ENGLISH LANGUAGE
CURRICULUM FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION (SHS 1 - 3)

NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR CURRICULUM & ASSESSMENT OF MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION REPUBLIC OF GHANA

SEPTEMBENEGLIRSH LAN2GUA0GE 2| 31

GHANA EDUCATION SERVICE
(MINISTRY OF EDUCATION)
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
REPUBLIC OF GHANA
PHYSICAL AND HEALRTEPUHBLICEODF GUHACNAATION CURRICULUM FOR BASIC 7 ­ 10
(COEMNMGOLNISCHORLEAPNRGOGURAAGMEME)
CURRICULUM FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION
(SHS 1-3)
SESePpTtEeMmBbeErR, 22002230

ENGLISH LANGUAGE Enquiries and comments on this Curriculum should be addressed to: The Director-General National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NaCCA) Ministry of Education P. O. Box CT PMB 77 Cantonments Accra Telephone: 0302909071, 0302909862 Email: info@nacca.gov.gh Website: www.nacca.gov.gh
©2023 National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NaCCA) This publication is not for sale.All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced without prior written permission from the Ministry of Education, Ghana.
2 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

FOREWORD

Through the National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NaCCA), Ghana's Ministry of Education has introduced a series of curriculum reforms to improve the quality and relevance of learning experiences in pre-tertiary schools in the country.These reforms will improve learning through the introduction of innovative pedagogies that encourage critical thinking and problem-solving. For a long time, our learners memorise facts and figures, which does not develop their analytical and practical skills.The Ministry recognises that learners need to be equipped with the right tools, knowledge, skills and competencies to deal with the fast-changing environment and the challenges facing their communities, the nation and the world.
These curriculum reforms were derived from the Education Strategic Plan (ESP 2018-2030), the National Pre-tertiary Education Curriculum Framework (NPTECF) and the National Pre-Tertiary Learning Assessment Framework (NPLAF), which were all approved by Cabinet in 2018.The new standards-based curriculum implemented in 2019 in basic schools, aims to equip learners to apply their knowledge innovatively to solve everyday problems. It also prioritises assessing learners' knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values, emphasising their achievements.The content of the basic school standards-based curriculum was therefore designed to promote a curriculum tailored to the diverse educational needs of the country's youth. It addresses the current curriculum's deficiencies in learning and assessment, especially in literacy and numeracy.These reforms have been carried out in phases.The curriculum for the basic school level ­ KG, Primary and Junior High School (JHS) ­ was developed and implemented from 2019 to 2021.

The curriculum for Senior High School (SHS), Senior High Technical School (SHTS) and Science, Technical, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM), which constitutes the next phase, is designed to ensure the continuation of learning experiences from JHS. It introduces flexible pathways for progression to facilitate the choice of subjects necessary for further study, the world of work and adult life.The new SHS, SHTS and STEM curriculum emphasises the acquisition of 21st Century skills and competencies, character development and instilling of national values. Social and Emotional Learning (SEL), Information Communications Technology, Gender Equality and Social Inclusion, have all been integrated into the curriculum. Assessment ­ formative and summative has been incorporated into the curriculum and aligned with the learning outcomes throughout the three-year programme.
The Ministry of Education's reform aims to ensure that graduates of our secondary schools can successfully compete in international high school competitions and, at the same time, be equipped with the necessary employable skills and work ethos to succeed in life.The Ministry of Education, therefore, sees the Senior High School (SHS) curriculum as occupying a critical place in the education system ­ providing improved educational opportunities and outcomes for further studies, the world of work and adult life ­ and is consequently prioritising its implementation.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 3

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This standards-based SHS curriculum was created using the National PreTertiary Learning Assessment Framework (NPLAF), the Secondary Education Assessment Guide (SEAG), and the Teacher and Learner Resource Packs which include Professional Learning Community (PLC) Materials and Subject Manuals for teachers and learners.All the above-mentioned documents were developed by the National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NaCCA).The Ministry of Education (MoE) provided oversight and strategic direction for the development of the curriculum with NaCCA receiving support from multiple agencies of the MoE and other relevant stakeholders. NaCCA would like to extend its sincere gratitude, on behalf of the MoE, to all its partners who participated in the professional conversations and discussions during the development of this SHS curriculum.
In particular, NaCCA would also like to extend its appreciation to the leadership of the Ghana Education Service (GES), the National School Inspectorate Authority (NaSIA), the National Teaching Council (NTC), the Commission for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (Commission for TVET), West African Examinations Council (WAEC) and other agencies of the MoE that supported the entire process. In addition, NaCCA acknowledges and values the contributions

made by personnel from various universities, colleges of education Industry players,Vice Chancellors Ghana,Vice Chancellors Technical Universities as well as educators and learners working within the Ghana education landscape.
Special appreciation is extended to consultants who contributed to development of the curriculum. The development process involved multiple engagements between national stakeholders and various groups with interests in the curriculum. These groups include the teacher unions, the Association of Ghana Industries, and heads of secondary schools.

4 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

CONTENTS

FOREWORD

3 YEAR TWO

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS THE SHS CURRICULUM OVERVIEW INTRODUCTION

4

STRAND 1. ORAL LANGUAGE

98

7

SUB-STRAND 1. ENGLISH SPEECH SOUNDS

98

8

SUB-STRAND 2. LISTENING COMPREHENSION

105

PHILOSOPHY,VISION AND GOAL OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE

19

SUB-STRAND 3. CONVERSATION/COMMUNICATION

109

ENGLISH LANGUAGE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT PANEL 20

STRAND 2. READING

112

SCOPE AND SEQUENCE

21

SUB-STRAND 1. READING COMPREHENSION

112

SUB-STRAND 2. SUMMARISING

120

YEAR ONE

STRAND 3. GRAMMAR

124

SUB-STRAND 1. GRAMMAR USAGE

124

STRAND 1. ORAL LANGUAGE

23

SUB-STRAND 2. VOCABULARY

134

SUB-STRAND1. ENGLISH SPEECH SOUNDS

23

STRAND 4. WRITING

137

SUB-STRAND 2. LISTENING COMPREHENSION

27

SUB-STRAND 1. PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF TEXT

137

SUB-STRAND 3. CONVERSATION/COMMUNICATION IN CONTEXT

31

SUB-STRAND 2. TEXT TYPES AND PURPOSES

144

STRAND 2

READING

34

SUB-STRAND 3. BUILDING AND PRESENTING KNOWLEDGE

152

SUB-STRAND 1 READING COMPREHENSION

34

STRAND 5. LITERATURE

156

SUB-STRAND

SUMMARISING

41

SUB-STRAND 1. POETRY, NARRATIVE AND DRAMA

156

STRAND 3. GRAMMAR USAGE

46 YEAR THREE

SUB-STRAND 1. SUB-STRAND 2.

GRAMMAR VOCABULARY

46

62

STRAND 1. ORAL LANGUAGE

163

SUB-STRAND 3. PUNCTUATION AND CAPITALIZATION

65

SUB-STRAND 1. ENGLISH SPEECH SOUNDS

163

STRAND 4. WRITING

68

SUB-STRAND 2. LISTENING COMPREHENSION

167

SUB-STRAND 1. PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF TEXT

68

SUB-STRAND 3. CONVERSATION/COMMUNICATION

171

SUB-STRAND 2. TEXT TYPES AND PURPOSES

75

STRAND 2. READING

175

SUB-STRAND 3. BUILDING AND PRESENTING KNOWLEDGE

84

SUB-STRAND 1. READING COMPREHENSION

175

STRAND 5. LITERATURE

87

SUB-STRAND 2. SUMMARISING

182

SUB-STRAND 1. NARRATIVE, DRAMA, POETRY

87

STRAND 3. GRAMMAR USAGE

186

SUB-STRAND 1. GRAMMAR

186

SUB-STRAND 2. VOCABULARY

197

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 5

STRAND 4. WRITING

200

SUB-STRAND 1. PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF TEXT

200

SUB-STRAND 2. TEXT TYPES AND PURPOSES

204

SUB-STRAND 3. BUILDING AND PRESENTING KNOWLEDGE

210

STRAND 5. LITERATURE

213

SUB-STRAND 1. NARRATIVE, POETRY AND DRAMA

213

6 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

THE SHS CURRICULUM OVERVIEW

The vision for this curriculum is to ensure the nation has a secondary education system that enables all Ghanaian children to acquire the 21st Century skills, competencies, knowledge, values and attitudes required to be responsible citizens, ready for the world of work, further studies and adult life.The nation's core values drive the SHS curriculum, and it is intended to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 4:`Inclusive, equitable quality education and life-long learning for all'.Above all, it is a curriculum enabling its graduates to contribute to the ongoing growth and development of the nation's economy and well-being.
The curriculum is inclusive, flexible, and robust. It was written under the auspices of the National Council for Curriculum and Assessment by a team of expert curriculum writers across Ghana. It reflects the needs of critical stakeholders, including industry, tertiary education, the West African Examination Council, SHS learners, teachers, and school leaders. It has been written based on the National Pre-Tertiary Learning and Assessment Framework and the Secondary Education Policy.
The key features of the curriculum include:
· flexible learning pathways at all levels, including for gifted and talented learners and those with deficiencies in numeracy and literacy, to ensure it can meet the needs of learners from diverse backgrounds and with different interests and abilities.
· the five core learning areas for secondary education: science and technology, language arts, humanities, technical and vocational and business; with emphasis placed on STEM and agriculture as integral to each subject.
· a structured, standards-based approach that supports the acquisition of knowledge, skills and competencies, and transition and seamless progress throughout secondary education, from JHS to SHS and through the three years of SHS.
· a focus on interactive approaches to teaching and assessment to ensure learning goes beyond recall enabling learners to acquire the ability to understand, apply, analyse and create.
· guidance on pedagogy, coupled with exemplars, demonstrating how to integrate cross-cutting themes such as 21st Century skills, core competencies,

the use of ICT, literacy and mathematics, Social Emotional Learning, Gender Equality and Social Inclusion as tools for learning and skills for life. Shared Ghanaian values are also embedded in the curriculum.
The curriculum writing process was rigorous and involved developing and using a Curriculum Writing Guide which provided systematic instructions for writers. The process was quality assured at three levels: through (a) evaluation by national experts, (b) trialling curriculum materials in schools and (c) through an external evaluation by a team of national and international experts. Evidence and insights from these activities helped hone the draft's final version. The outcome is a curriculum coherently aligned with national priorities, policies and the needs of stakeholders. A curriculum tailored to the Ghanaian context ensures that all learners benefit from their schooling and develop their full potential.
The following section highlights the details of the front matter of the draft curriculum.The vision, philosophy and goal of the curriculum are presented.This is followed by the details of the 21st Century skills and competencies, teaching and learning approaches, instructional design and assessment strategies.The template for the curriculum frame, which outlines the scope and sequence, the design that links the learning outcomes to particular 21st Century skills and competencies, as well as Gender Equality and Social Inclusion, Social and Emotional Learning and Ghanaian values are presented together with the structure of the lesson frame showing the links between the content standards, learning indicators with their corresponding pedagogical exemplars and assessment strategies.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 7

INTRODUCTION

Effective implementation of this Senior High School (SHS) curriculum is the key to creating a well-educated and well-balanced workforce that is ready to contribute to Ghana's progress by harnessing the potential of the growing youth population, considering the demographic transition the country is currently experiencing (Educational Strategic Plan [ESP] 2018-2030). SHS curriculum aims to expand equitable, inclusive access to relevant education for all young people, including those in disadvantaged and underserved communities, those with special educational needs and those who are gifted and talented. Senior High School allows young people to develop further skills and competencies and progress in learning achievement, building from the foundation laid in Junior High School. This curriculum intends to meet the learning needs of all high school learners by acquiring 21st Century skills and competencies to prepare them for further studies, the world of work and adult life. Changing global economic, social and technological context requires life-long learning, unlearning, and continuous processes of reflection, anticipation and action.
Philosophy of Senior High School Curriculum
The philosophy underpinning the SHS curriculum is that every learner can develop their potential to the fullest if the right environment is created and skilled teachers effectively support them to benefit from the subjects offered at SHS. Every learner needs to be equipped with skills and competencies of interest to further their education, live a responsible adult life or proceed to the world of work.
Vision of Senior High School Curriculum
The vision of the curriculum is to prepare SHS graduates equipped with relevant skills and competencies to progress and succeed in further studies, the world of work and adult life. It aims to equip all learners with the 21st Century skills and competencies required to be responsible citizens and lifelong learners.When young people are prepared to become effective, engaging, and responsible citizens, they will contribute to the ongoing growth and development of the nation's economy and well-being.

Goal of Senior High School Curriculum
The goal of the curriculum is to achieve relevant and quality SHS through the integration of 21st Century skills and competencies as set out in the Secondary Education Policy.The key features to integrate into the curriculum are:
· Foundational Knowledge: literacy, numeracy, scientific literacy, information, communication and digital literacies, financial literacy and entrepreneurship, cultural identity, civic literacy and global citizenship
· Competencies: critical thinking and problem-solving, innovation and creativity, collaboration, and communication
· Character Qualities: discipline, integrity, self-directed learning, self-confidence, adaptability and resourcefulness, leadership, and responsible citizenship.
The JHS curriculum has been designed to ensure that learners are adequately equipped to transition seamlessly into SHS, where they will be equipped with the relevant knowledge, skills and competencies.The SHS curriculum emphasises character building, acquisition of 21st Century skills and competencies and nurturing core values within an environment of quality education to ensure the transition to further study, the world of work and adult life.This requires the delivery of robust secondary education that meets the varied learning needs of the youth in Ghana.The SHS curriculum, therefore, seeks to develop learners to become technology-inclined, scientifically literate, good problem-solvers who can think critically and creatively and are equipped to communicate with fluency, and possess the confidence and competence to participate fully in Ghanaian society as responsible local and global citizens ­ (referred to as `Glocal citizens').
The SHS curriculum is driven by the nation's core values of truth, integrity, diversity, equity, discipline, self-directed learning, self-confidence, adaptability and resourcefulness, leadership, and responsible citizenship, and with the intent of achieving the Sustainable Development Goal 4: `Inclusive, equitable quality education and life-long learning for all'.The following sections elaborate on the critical competencies required of every SHS learner:

8 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI)
· Appreciate their uniqueness about others. · Pay attention to the uniqueness and unique needs of others. · Value the perspective, experience, and opinion of others. · Respect individuals of different beliefs, political views/ leanings, cultures, and
religions. · Embrace diversity and practise inclusion. · Value and work in favour of a democratic and inclusive society. · Be conscious of the existence of minority and disadvantaged groups in society
and work to support them. · Gain clarity about misconceptions/myths about gender, disability, ethnicity,
age, religion, and all other excluded groups in society · Interrogate and dispel their stereotypes and biases about gender and other
disadvantaged and excluded groups in society. · Appreciate the influence of socialisation in shaping social norms, roles,
responsibilities, and mindsets. · Identify injustice and advocate for change. · Feel empowered to speak up for themselves and be a voice for other
disadvantaged groups.
21st Century Skills and Competencies
In today's fast-changing world, high school graduates must be prepared for the 21st Century world of work.The study of Mathematics, Science, and Language Arts alone is no longer enough. High school graduates need a variety of skills and competencies to adapt to the global economy. Critical thinking, creativity, collaboration, communication, information literacy, media literacy, technology literacy, flexibility, leadership, initiative, productivity, and social skills are needed. These skills help learners to keep up with today's fast-paced job market. Employers want workers with more than academic knowledge.The 21st Century skills and competencies help graduates navigate the complex and changing workplace. Also, these help them become active citizens who improve their communities. Acquisition of 21st Century skills in high school requires a change in pedagogy from the approach that has been prevalent in Ghana in recent years.Teachers should discourage and abandon rote memorisation and passive learning. Instead, they should encourage active learning, collaboration, and problem-solving, project-

based, inquiry-based, and other learner-centred pedagogy should be used.As well as aligning with global best practices, these approaches also seek to reconnect formal education in Ghana with values-based indigenous education and discoverybased learning which existed in Ghana in pre-colonial times.This is aligned with the `glocal' nature of this curriculum, connecting with Ghana's past to create confident citizens who can engage effectively in a global world. Digitalisation, automation, technological advances and the changing nature of work globally mean that young people need a new set of skills, knowledge and competencies to succeed in this dynamic and globalised labour market.
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving Competency
· Ability to question norms, practices, and opinions, to reflect on one's values, perceptions, and actions.
· Ability to use reasoning skills to come to a logical conclusion. · Being able to consider different perspectives and points of view · Respecting evidence and reasoning · Not being stuck in one position · Ability to take a position in a discourse · The overarching ability to apply different problem-solving frameworks to
complex problems and develop viable, inclusive, and equitable solution options that integrate the above-mentioned competencies, promote sustainable development,
Creativity
· Ability to identify and solve complex problems through creative thinking. · Ability to generate new ideas and innovative solutions to old problems. · Ability to demonstrate originality and flexibility in approaching tasks and
challenges. · Collaborating with others to develop and refine creative ideas · Ability to incorporate feedback and criticism into the creative process · Utilising technology and other resources to enhance creativity · Demonstrating a willingness to take risks and experiment with new approaches · Adapting to changing circumstances and further information to maintain
creativity

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 9

· Integrating multiple perspectives and disciplines to foster creativity · Ability to communicate creative ideas effectively to a variety of audiences
Collaboration · Abilities to learn from others; to understand and respect the needs,
perspectives, and actions of others (empathy) · Ability to understand, relate to and be sensitive to others (empathic leadership) · Ability to deal with conflicts in a group · Ability to facilitate collaborative and participatory problem-solving · Ability to work with others to achieve a common goal. · Ability to engage in effective communication, active listening, and the ability
to compromise. · Ability to work in groups on projects and assignments.
Communication · Know the specific literacy and language of the subjects studied · Use language for academic purposes · Communicate effectively and meaningfully in a Ghanaian Language and English
Language · Communicate confidently, ethically, and effectively in different social contexts. · Communicate confidently and effectively to different participants in different
contexts · Ability to communicate effectively verbally, non-verbally and through writing. · Demonstrate requisite personal and social skills that are consistent with
changes in society · Ability to express ideas clearly and persuasively, listen actively, and respond
appropriately · Ability to develop digital communication skills such as email etiquette and
online collaboration. · Ability to engage in public speaking, debate, and written communication.
Learning for Life · Understand subject content and apply it in different contexts · Apply mathematical and scientific concepts in daily life

· Demonstrate mastery of skills in literacy, numeracy, and digital literacy. · Develop an inquiry-based approach to continual learning. · Be able to understand higher-order concepts and corresponding underlying
principles. · Participate in the creative use of the expressive arts and engage in aesthetic
appreciation. · Use and apply a variety of digital technologies · Be digitally literate with a strong understanding of ICT and be confident in
its application. · Be equipped with the necessary qualifications to gain access to further and
higher education and the world of work and adult life · Ability to apply knowledge practically in the workplace so that they are able
to utilise theory by translating it into practice. · Develop their abilities, gifts and talents to be able to play a meaningful role
in the development of the country · Be able to think critically and creatively, anticipate consequences, recognise
opportunities and be risk-takers · Ability to pursue self-directed learning with the desire to chart a path to
become effective lifelong learners. · Independent thinkers and doers who show initiative and take action. · Ability to innovate and think creatively, building on their knowledge base so
that they take risks to achieve new goals · Ability to think critically and solve problems so that they become positive
change agents at work, in further study and in their personal lives. · Be motivated to adapt to the changing needs of society through self-evaluation
and ongoing training · Be able to establish and maintain innovative enterprises both individually and
in collaboration with others. · Be able to ethically prioritise economic values to ensure stability and autonomy · Show flexibility and preparedness to deal with job mobility · Be committed towards the improvement of their quality of life and that of
others · Feel empowered in decision-making processes at various levels e.g., personal,
group, class, school, etc.

10 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· Be able to seek and respond to assistance, guidance and/or support when needed.
· Ability to make and adhere to commitments. · Adopt a healthy and active lifestyle and appreciate how to use leisure time
well. · Be enthusiastic, with the knowledge, understanding and skill that enable them
to progress to tertiary level, the world of work and adult life. · Ability to transition from school to the world of work or further study by
applying knowledge, skills and attitudes in new situations. · Be independent, have academic and communication skills such as clarity of
expression (written and spoken), and the ability to support their arguments. · Be innovative and understand the 21st Century skills and competencies and
apply them to everyday life.
Global and Local (Glocal) Citizenship · Appreciate and respect the Ghanaian identity, culture, and heritage · Be conscious of current global issues and relate well with people from different
cultures · Act in favour of the common good, social cohesion and social justice · Have the requisite personal and social skills to handle changes in society · Appreciate the impact of globalisation on the society. · Ability to be an honest global citizen displaying leadership skills and moral
fortitude with an understanding of the wider world and how to enhance Ghana's standing.
Systems Thinking Competency · Ability to recognise and understand relationships · Ability to analyse complex systems · Ability to think of how systems are embedded within different domains and
different scales · Ability to deal with uncertainty
Normative Competency · Ability to understand and reflect on the norms and values that underlie one's
actions

· Ability to negotiate values, principles, goals, and targets, in a context of conflicts of interests and trade-offs, uncertain knowledge and contradictions
Anticipatory Competency · Ability to understand and evaluate multiple futures ­ possible, probable, and
desirable · Ability to create one's vision for the future. · Ability to apply the precautionary principle · Ability to assess the consequences of actions · Ability to deal with risks and changes
Strategic Competency · Ability to collectively develop and implement innovative actions that further
a cause at the local level and beyond. · Ability to understand the bigger picture and the implications of smaller actions
on them
Self-Awareness Competency · The ability to reflect on one's role in the local community and (global) society · Ability to continually evaluate and further motivate one's actions · Ability to deal with one's feelings and desires
Social Emotional Learning (SEL): Five Core Competencies with Examples
1. Self-Awareness Understanding one's emotions, thoughts, and values and how they influence one's behaviour in various situations. This includes the ability to recognise one's strengths and weaknesses with a sense of confidence and purpose. For instance:
· Integrating personal and social identities; · Identifying personal, cultural, and linguistic assets; · Identifying one's emotions; · Demonstrating honesty and integrity; · Connecting feelings, values, and thoughts;

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 11

· Examining prejudices and biases; · Experiencing self-efficacy; · Having a growth mindset; · Developing interests and a sense of purpose;
2. Self-Management The capacity to control one's emotions, thoughts, and actions in a variety of situations and to realise one's ambitions. This includes delaying obtaining one's desires, dealing with stress, and feeling motivated and accountable for achieving personal and group goals. For instance:
· Managing one's emotions; · Identifying and utilising stress-management strategies; · Demonstrating self-discipline and self-motivation; · Setting personal and group goals; · Using planning and organisation skills; · Having the courage to take the initiative; · Demonstrating personal and collective agency;
3. Social Awareness The capacity to comprehend and care for others regardless of their backgrounds, cultures, and circumstances.This includes caring for others, understanding larger historical and social norms for behaviour in different contexts, and recognising family, school, and community resources and supports. For instance:
· Recognising others' strengths · Demonstrating empathy and compassion · Caring about others' feelings · Understanding and expressing gratitude · Recognising situational demands and opportunities · Understanding how organisations and systems influence behaviour
4. Relationship Skills The capacity to establish and maintain healthy, beneficial relationships and adapt to various social situations and groups.This includes speaking clearly, listening attentively, collaborating, solving problems and resolving conflicts as a group,

adapting to diverse social and cultural demands and opportunities, taking the initiative, and asking for or offering assistance when necessary. For instance:
· Communicating effectively; · Building positive relationships; · Demonstrating cultural competence; · Working as a team to solve problems; · Constructively resolving conflicts; · Withstanding negative social pressure; · Taking the initiative in groups; · Seeking or assisting when needed; · Advocating for the rights of others.
5. Responsible Decision-Making The capacity to make thoughtful and constructive decisions regarding acting and interacting with others in various situations. This includes weighing the pros and cons of various personal, social, and group well-being actions. For example:
· Demonstrating curiosity and an open mind; · Solving personal and social problems; · Learning to make reasonable decisions after analysing information, data, and facts; · Anticipating and evaluating the effects of one's actions; · Recognising that critical thinking skills are applicable both inside and outside of the
classroom; · Reflecting on one's role in promoting personal, family, and community well-being; · Evaluating personal, interpersonal, community, and institutional impacts
Learning and Teaching Approaches Learning and teaching should develop learners as self-directed and lifelong learners. Learners must be helped to build up deep learning skills and competencies to develop the ability to acquire, integrate and apply knowledge and skills to solve authentic and real-life problems. Learners need to be exposed to a variety of learning experiences to enable them to collaborate with others, construct meaning, plan, manage, and make choices and decisions about their learning.This will allow them to internalise newly acquired knowledge and skills and help them

12 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

to take ownership of their education.The 21st Century skills and competencies describe the relevant global and contextualised skills that the SHS curriculum is designed to help learners acquire in addition to the 4Rs (Reading, wRiting, aRithmetic and cReativity).These skills and competencies, as tools for learning and teaching and skills for life, will allow learners to become critical thinkers, problemsolvers, creators, innovators, good communicators, collaborators, digitally literate, and culturally and globally sensitive citizens who are life-long learners with a keen interest in their personal development and contributing to national development.
Given the diverse needs of learners, teachers need to have a thorough grasp of the different pedagogies as they design and enact meaningful learning experiences to meet the needs of different learners in the classroom. The teaching-learning techniques and strategies should include practical activities, discussion, investigation, role play, problem-based, context-based, and projectbased learning. Active learning strategies have become increasingly popular in education as they provide learners with meaningful opportunities to engage with the material.These strategies emphasise the use of creative and inclusive pedagogies and learner-centred approaches anchored on authentic and enquirybased learning, collaborative and cooperative learning, differentiated teaching and learning, holistic learning, and cross-disciplinary learning.They include experiential learning, problem-based learning, project-based learning, and talk-for-learning approaches. Some of the pedagogical exemplars to guide learning and teaching of the SHS curriculum include:
· Experiential Learning: Experiential learning is a hands-on approach to learning that involves learners in real-world experiences.This approach focuses on the process of learning rather than the result. Learners are encouraged to reflect on their experiences and use them to develop new skills and knowledge. Experiential learning can take many forms, including internships, service learning, and field trips. One of the main benefits of experiential learning is that it allows learners to apply what they have learned in the classroom to real-world situations.This can help them develop a deeper understanding of the material and make connections between different concepts.Additionally, experiential learning can help learners develop important skills such as critical thinking, problem-solving and communication.
· Problem-Based Learning: Problem-based learning is an approach that involves learners in solving real-world problems. Learners are presented with

a problem or scenario and are asked to work together to find a solution.This approach encourages learners to take an active role in their learning and helps them develop important skills such as critical thinking and problem-solving. One of the main benefits of problem-based learning is that it encourages learners to take ownership of their learning. By working together to solve problems, learners can develop important skills such as collaboration and communication.Additionally, problem-based learning can help learners develop a deeper understanding of the material as they apply it to real-world situations.
· Project-Based Learning: Project-based learning is a hands-on approach to learning that involves learners in creating a project or product.This approach allows learners to take an active role in their learning and encourages them to develop important skills such as critical thinking, problem-solving, collaboration, and communication. One of the main benefits of project-based learning is that it allows learners to apply what they have learned in the classroom to real-world situations. Additionally, project-based learning can help learners develop important skills from each other and develop a deeper understanding of the material.
· Talk for Learning Approaches: Talk for learning approaches (TfL) are a range of techniques and strategies that are used to encourage learners to talk by involving them in discussions and debates about the material they are learning.This approach encourages learners to take an active role in their learning and helps them develop important skills such as critical thinking, collaboration and communication and also makes them develop confidence. One of the main benefits of TfL is that it encourages learners to think deeply about the material they are learning. By engaging in discussions and debates, learners can develop a deeper understanding of the material and make connections between different concepts.
· Initiating Talk for Learning: Initiating talk for learning requires the use of strategies that would encourage learners to talk in class. It helps learners to talk and participate meaningfully and actively in the teaching and learning process. Apart from developing skills such as communication and critical thinking, it also helps learners to develop confidence. Some strategies for initiating talk among learners are Activity Ball; Think-Pair-Share; Always, Sometimes, Never True; Matching and Ordering of Cards.
· Building on What Others Say: Building on what others say is an approach that involves learners in listening to and responding to their classmates'

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 13

ideas. This approach encourages learners to take an active role in their learning and helps them develop important skills such as critical thinking and communication. One of the main benefits of building on what others say is that it encourages learners to think deeply about the material they are learning. By listening to their classmates' ideas, learners can develop a deeper understanding of the material and make connections between different concepts.Additionally, building on what others say can help learners develop important skills such as collaboration and reflection. Some of the strategies to encourage learners to build on what others say are brainstorming, concept cartoons, pyramid discussion, and 5 Whys, amongst others.
· Managing Talk for Learning: Managing talk for learning requires the use of various strategies to effectively coordinate what learners say in class. Effective communication is a crucial aspect of learning in the classroom.Teachers must manage talk to ensure that learners are engaged, learning, and on-task in meaningful and purposeful ways. Some strategies for managing learners' contributions are debates, think-pair-share, sage in the circle etc.
· Structuring Talk for Learning: One effective way to shape learners' contributions is to structure classroom discussions. Structured discussions provide a framework for learners to engage in meaningful dialogue and develop critical thinking skills.Teachers can structure discussions by providing clear guidelines, such as speaking one at a time, listening actively, and building on each other's ideas. One popular structured discussion technique is the "thinkpair-share" method. In this method, learners think about a question or prompt individually, and then pair up with a partner to discuss their ideas. Finally, the pairs share their ideas with the whole class.This method encourages all learners to participate and ensures that everyone has a chance to share their thoughts.Another effective way to structure talk for learning is to use openended questions. Open-ended questions encourage learners to think deeply and critically about a topic.They also promote discussion and collaboration among learners.Teachers can use open-ended questions to guide classroom discussions and encourage learners to share their ideas and perspectives. Other strategies that can be used are Concept/Mind Mapping,"Know," "Want to Know," "Learned" (KWL); Participatory Feedback; and the 5 Whys.
· Diamond Nine: The Diamond Nine activity is a useful tool for managing talk for learning in the classroom.This activity involves ranking items or ideas in order of importance or relevance. Learners work in groups to arrange cards

or sticky notes with different ideas or concepts into a diamond shape, with the most important idea at the top and the least important at the bottom. The Diamond Nine activity encourages learners to think critically about a topic and prioritise their ideas. It also promotes collaboration and discussion among group members.Teachers can use this activity to introduce a new topic, review material, or assess student understanding.
· Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Group work or collaborative learning are effective strategies for managing talk for learning in the classroom. These strategies encourage learners to work together to solve problems, share ideas, and learn from each other. Group work and collaborative learning also promote communication and collaborative skills that are essential for success in the workplace and in life.To implement group work effectively, teachers must provide clear guidelines and expectations for group members. They should also monitor group work to ensure that all learners are participating and on-task.Teachers can also use group work as an opportunity to assess individual student understanding and participation.
· Inquiry-Based Learning: Learners explore and discover new information by asking questions and investigating.
· Problem-Based Learning: Learners are given real-world problems to solve and must use critical thinking and problem-solving skills.
· Project-Based Learning: Learners work on long-term projects that relate to real-world scenarios.
· Flipped Classroom: Learners watch lectures or instructional videos at home and complete assignments and activities in class.
· Mastery-Based Learning: Learners learn at their own pace and only move on to new material once they have mastered the current material.
· Gamification: Learning is turned into a game-like experience with points, rewards, and competition.
These strategies provide learners with opportunities to engage with the material in meaningful ways and develop important skills such as critical thinking, problemsolving, collaboration, and communication. By incorporating these strategies into their teaching, teachers can help learners develop a deeper understanding of the material and prepare them for success in the real world. Effective communication is essential for learning in the classroom.Teachers must manage talk to ensure that learners are engaged in learning and on-task. Strategies such as structuring

14 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

talk for learning, using Diamond Nine activities, and implementing group work/ collaborative learning can help teachers manage talk effectively and promote student learning and engagement. By implementing these strategies, teachers can create a positive and productive learning environment where all learners can succeed.
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) in the SHS Curriculum The design of the curriculum uses UDL to ensure the creation of flexible learning environments that can accommodate a wide range of learner abilities, needs, and preferences.The curriculum is designed to provide multiple means of engagement, representation, and action and expression, so teachers can create a more inclusive and effective learning experience for all learners. UDL is beneficial for all learners, but it is particularly beneficial for learners needing special support and learners who may struggle with traditional teaching approaches.The integration of UDL in the pedagogy is aimed at making learning accessible to everyone and helping all learners reach their full potential. For instance, teachers need to:
· incorporate multiple means of representation into their pedagogy, such as using different types of media and materials to present information.
· provide learners with multiple means of action and expression, such as giving them options for how they can demonstrate their learning.
· consider incorporating multiple means of engagement into their choice of pedagogy, such as incorporating games or interactive activities to make learning more fun and engaging.
By doing these, teachers can help ensure that the curriculum is accessible and effective for all learners, regardless of their individual needs and abilities.
Curriculum and Assessment Design: Revised Bloom's Taxonomy and Webb's Depth of Knowledge The design of this curriculum uses the revised Bloom's Taxonomy and Webb's Depth of Knowledge (DoK) as frameworks to design what to teach and assess.
The Revised Bloom's Taxonomy provides a framework for designing effective learning experiences. Understanding the different levels of learning, informed the creation of activities and assessments that challenge learners at the appropriate level and help them progress to higher levels of thinking. Additionally, the framework emphasises the importance of higher-order thinking skills, such

as analysis, evaluation, and creation, which are essential for success in today's complex and rapidly changing world. This framework is a valuable tool for educators who want to design effective learning experiences that challenge students at the appropriate level and help them develop higher-order thinking skills. By understanding the six levels of learning and incorporating them into their teaching, educators can help prepare students for success in the 21st century. The six hierarchical levels of the revised Bloom's Taxonomy are:
1. Remember ­ At the foundation is learners' ability to remember. That is retrieving knowledge from long-term memory.This level requires learners to recall concepts--identify, recall, and retrieve information. Remembering is comprised of identifying, listing, and describing. Retrieving relevant knowledge from long-term memory includes, recognising, and recalling is critical for this level.
2. Understand ­ At understanding, learners are required to construct meaning that can be shown through clarification, paraphrasing, representing, comparing, contrasting and the ability to predict. This level requires interpretation, demonstration, and classification. Learners explain and interpret concepts at this level.
3. Apply ­ This level requires learners' ability to carry out procedures at the right time in a given situation.This level requires the application of knowledge to novel situations as well as executing, implementing, and solving problems. To apply, learners must solve multi-step problems.
4. Analyse ­ The ability to break things down into their parts and determine relationships between those parts and being able to tell the difference between what is relevant and irrelevant.At this level, information is deconstructed, and its relationships are understood. Comparing and contrasting information and organising it is key. Breaking material into its constituent parts and detecting how the parts relate to one another and an overall structure or purpose is required.The analysis also includes differentiating, organising and attributing.
5. Evaluate ­ The ability to make judgments based on criteria. To check whether there are fallacies and inconsistencies.This level involves information evaluation, critique, examination, and formulation of hypotheses.
6. Create ­ The ability to design a project or an experiment.To create, entails learners bringing something new.This level requires generating information-- planning, designing, and constructing.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 15

Webb's Depth of Knowledge (DoK) is a framework that helps educators and The main distinction between these two conceptual frameworks is what is

learners understand the level of cognitive engagement required for different measured. The revised Bloom's Taxonomy assesses the cognitive level that

types of learning tasks.The framework includes four levels. By understanding the learners must demonstrate as evidence that a learning experience occurred.

four DoK levels, educators can design learning activities that challenge students The DoK, on the other hand, is focused on the context--the scenario, setting, or

to engage in deeper thinking and problem-solving. DoK is an essential tool for situation--in which learners should express their learning. In this curriculum, the

designing effective instruction and assessments. By understanding the different revised Bloom's taxonomy guided the design, and the DoK is used to guide the

levels of DoK, teachers can design instruction and assessments that align with assessment of learning.The taxonomy provides the instructional framework, and

what they intend to achieve. DoK is a useful tool for differentiating instruction the DoK analyses the assignment specifics. It is important to note that Bloom's

aidnedntpirfyovstiduidnegnatpspwrohoprniaeteedcaAhdgadrlliiectuinolgtnuearsal lfsoSurcpiepanlolcrleetaorrnethros.sTeeawchhoerasrecarne audsye

DOK to for more

Taxonomy requires learners to master the lower levels before progressing to the next. So, suppose the goal is to apply a mathematical formula. In that case, they

advanced tasks.The four levels aosfsW essembebn'st' tDasokKreaqsusireesssmleearnntefrrsatmoeawnaolyrskeaarned: evaluate mcoumstpofisritset rbeeala-wbloerltdopirdoebnletmifys twhiatht fporremdicutlaablaenoduittcsopmreims. aAryleaprunrepromseus(traepmpleymlobgeicr,

· oLfefvaectls1, c:oRnecceapltls,ainnfdorRmea3pt.iroonLaeumd,etavuphnelecdolntytpi4iopcr:ronpoEcrbx­eoltdebAemulensrm-dseseose--sldwvsimnitCgherissnuittntriinapcatvraeteolgdtliTvheicesihts,saianblbnelkaedvisenoiuclgusietkscansoonkomdniwllesrRlseefreidcsoagamtselhloemngiunoltagtailpo.n­lTeddhAseueutmnbldetjoehaecnrirstnsseatlterrraveanmeatdlesu)ost.tTotfhhbeageeselsneaecebasorlsregamntntieeniotnsgivtso,teplrutrarthotiieoegggonrlieseuc.aasrMrlslniyisuoealrtntn'his.taWealesyrksxeheitfneoe,gnnirndiesvmeepedsexrtaepitgshseauiectnrtenkei,tnidneaggndodaftisonlrseeeiasfnrlsoecnslcvrmeteerwesmcnahoettimnlsetthpiawnilsleoDsxlertkveoaeipnKnlds.g,

·

Lgaaconeqdevuseaissbliste2eiyo:sosSnnm.kLdeielnslasitrmsno.TpeflrheCseraoaernsecscaeafTlerslshapkstmemeotttpeduhoaeiwemnransstmopclotaroleislUuinvkesfcedslintvffehoiaeddciicsssimpes.uqtrarasiuowsnesksebchtedisltnaaesitotsogminomnnc,dniesoorsinnebrnttmecg,noctothewh­llaacaleesnetuAuegiclnorenistnecainsogdhresnn.ttsahebhscaerTemetnsihtmiredveweiauntrepsiteteretpwepasrnkvt,roonieopsatoxechdiweedhciuscorcthcenloBteoiscislovweoaeoencposfclt.t,muooam'sel mvapt(loelDhurdaeoaoartbtnleKeeleeatnmrh2resenwaiwermnriipdntormhfvooDeaagroymrfefoKlapsurtsriim3ooda)nnglu.y.drlDaeTt,dshheleseerptaoetearorunsnmsgdeDehiirsnnosseagmKrlwleeo4nhclnetae.vlttrlhehetelqehsru.edtiIrhnfieofefsyritchmsauoerulpetlshyaoais(omntDifcteoarttahKeecexdk1apat)morntodopablcseflreeo,eamlawsvtiebihtvloeitelhestbehoseilpnourkstloivoioniblnngvl.egefAomdars,

information.The learnerT'saaxpopnolimcaytioasnseossfesskitlhlseacnodgnciotinvecelpevtselisthaastselesasrende.rTshmeust assessment task is focuseddemmoonrsetroantetheasuseevoidfeinncfoermthaatitonatolesaorlnveingmueltxi-psetreiepnce problems.A learner is reocqocuncuitrerexrdet--dt.otThmheeaksDceoendKae,rciooisn,iothsneesttaoinbtgho,eurtohhraonwdsi,tutisoatfioaopcnup--sleyindfaocwntshtihche and details provided to tlheaermne.rs should express their learning. In this curriculum, the

Webb's Depth of Knowledge Assessment

Recall/ Reproduction

Basic Skills/ Concepts

Strategic Thinking

Extende d
Reasonin g

· Level 3: Strategic RearseovnisiendgB­loAomt t'shitsaxleovneolm, tyheguliedaerdntehre'sdsetsriagtne, gaincdtthhinekDinogK is and reasoning which is abussterdacttoangudidceomthpeleaxssiessassmseenstseodf.Tlehaernaisnsge. sTsmheentatxtoanskomy prerqeudiircetsablelearonuertcsotomaensa. AlytTpshraleeeoxavaoairnsndnsdoeiegsmenrtvymhmaeelruuneiantsqtstusetpirarecupecocspitmfliioyclepsnal.oaorIlstngifetiirsceras,mimreeetmpwoaolp-orwmltroakoany,srtatlpedntrordopntrbthoholeeetbemlDelto-homswaKostelaBwrvnlioinalteolhgyvmseel'sss strategies, and use skillsbferfoomre mpruolgtripeslesinsgubtojecthtearneeaxst. tSoo,gesunpeproastee tshoelugtoioalniss. to Multitasking is expectedaopfplyearmneatrhseamtatthiciasl lfeovreml.ula. In that case, they must first be

Create Evaluate Analyse

DOK 1

DOK 2

DOK 3

DOK 4

· Lasesveesslm4e: nEtx, ttheenldeeardneCrr's(atirhtbeeeilxecmrteaeefltomnoTrdbeheeidridpnerntkeahtsiniienfndyngkteitnauhdgnnadtidtneorfRosisntreoacmnralvedusem)loa. ecnnoaTitnmnahdlgepsl­eittcexsoApsgatpnnrtitdtiohmiviaseadurelytemhrvieogepnonul tusroitprcrfoastiees problems with unpredictatbhele loeuartncionmg epsroisgrtehsesigoona. l.WThheenleamrenaesrurminugstasbseesasbmleenttos in strategically analyse, invesDtoigKa,tele, arnndersefmleocvtewfhluiliedlywothrrkoiungghtoallsolelvelsa. pInrotbhleemsa,me

Apply Understand

DOK 1

DOK 2

or changing their approacehxatmopalcec, owmhmileosdoaltveinngeawpirnofoblremmatwioitnh.Taheforamssuelsas, mleeanrnters requires sophisticated anredcaclrl ethaetivfoermthuilnak(iDngo.KA1s)ptaorstoolvfetthhies parsosbelsesmm(eDnot,Kth2eand learner must know howDsotoolvKeedv3,a)t.lhuDeateleepaetrnhndeeirinrgmpaorynopgtrrhoeegsrsdeisaffsnictduoltdDyeootKef rt4mh.einperowbhleemthetor be they are on track to a feasible solution for themselves.

Remember
Figure 1: Revised Bloom Taxonomy combined with Webb's Depth of Knowledge for Teaching and Assessment

16 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

The structure of teaching and the assessment should align with the six levels of Bloom's knowledge hierarchy and DoK shown in Figure 1. Each level of

DoK should be used to assess specific domains of Bloom's Taxonomy as illustrated in the table below:

Depth of Knowledge (DoK)

Bloom's Taxonomy applied to DoK

Assessment

Level 1: Recall and Reproduction

Remembering, Understanding, Application, Analysis and Creation

Level 2: Basic Skills and Concepts

Understanding, Application, Analysis and Creation

The structure of teaching and the assessment should align with the six levels should be used to assess specific domains of Bloom's Taxonomy as illustrated of Bloom's knowledge hierarchy and DoK shown in Figure 1. Each level of DoK in the table below:

Depth of Knowledge (DoK) Assessment
· Level 1: Recall and Reproduction
· Level 2: Basic Skills and Concepts
· Level 3: Strategic Thinking
· Level 4: Extended Reasoning
In line with the National Pre-Tertiary Learning and Assessment Framework, the Secondary Education Assessment Guide (SEAG) requires that classroom assessments should cover Assessment as learning (AaL), Assessment of learning (AoL) and Assessment for learning (AfL). Therefore, teachers should align the Revised Bloom's Taxonomy with the DoK framework of assessment. Formative assessments should include classroom discussions, projectbased assignments, and self-reflection exercises, while summative assessments should include standardised tests and rubric-based evaluations of learners' work. It is important to seek feedback from learners themselves, as they may have unique insights into how well they are developing these skills in the classroom.
To assess 21st Century skills and competencies in the classroom, teachers will have to use a combination of both formative and summative assessments to evaluate learners' acquisition of these skills and competencies. For instance:
· Identify the specific 21st Century skills and competencies to be assessed. For instance, you might want to assess critical thinking, problem-solving, or creativity.
· Align the skills and competencies with the DoK levels. For example, lower DoK levels might be more appropriate for assessing basic knowledge and

Bloom's Taxonomy applied to DoK
· Remembering, Understanding, Application, Analysis and Creation
· Understanding, Application, Analysis and Creation
· Understanding, Application, Analysis, Evaluation and Creation
· Understanding, Application, Analysis, Evaluation and Creation
comprehension, whereas higher DoK levels might be more appropriate for assessing more complex skills such as analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. · Develop assessment items that align with the DoK levels and the skills and competencies you want to assess.These items should be designed to elicit evidence of learning across the different levels of the DoK framework. · Administer the assessment and collect data.Analyse the data to gain insights into student learning and identify areas where learners may need additional support or instruction. The DoK framework is a powerful tool for assessing the acquisition of 21st Century skills and competencies in the classroom, helping teachers to better understand how learners are learning and identify areas for improvement.
Educational success is no longer about producing content knowledge, but rather about extrapolating from what we know and applying the knowledge creatively in new situations.
The overall assessment of learning at SHS should be aligned with the National Pre-Tertiary Learning and Assessment Framework and the Secondary Education Assessment Guide. Formative and summative assessment strategies must be used.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 17

Definition of Key Terms and Concepts in the Curriculum
· Learning Outcomes: It is a statement that defines the knowledge, skills, and abilities that learners should possess and be able to demonstrate after completing a learning experience.They are specific, measurable, attainable, and aligned with the content standards of the curriculum. It helps the teachers to determine what to teach, how to teach, and how to assess learning. Also, it communicates expectations to learners and helps them to better master the subject.
· Learning Indicators: They are measures that allow teachers to observe progress in the development of capacities and skills.They provide a simple and reliable means to evaluate the quality and efficacy of teaching practices, content delivery, and attainment of learning outcomes.
· Content Standards: It is a statement that defines the knowledge, skills, and understanding that learners are expected to learn in a particular subject area or grade level.They provide a clear target for learners and teachers and help focus resources on learner achievement.
· Pedagogical Exemplars: They are teaching examples used to convey values and standards to learners. Pedagogical Exemplars are usually demonstrated through teacher behaviour.

· Assessment: It is the systematic collection and analysis of data about learners' learning to improve the learning process or make a judgement on learner achievement levels. Assessment is aimed at developing a deep understanding of what learners know, understand, and can do with their knowledge because of their educational experiences.Assessment involves the use of empirical data on learners' learning to improve learning.Assessment is an essential aspect of the teaching and learning process in education, which enables teachers to assess the effectiveness of their teaching by linking learner performance to specific learning outcomes.
· Teaching and Learning Resources: Teaching and learning resources are essential tools for teachers to provide high-quality education to their learners. These resources can take various forms, including textbooks, audiovisual materials, online resources, and educational software. It is also important to avoid stereotypes and use inclusive language in teaching and learning resources. This means avoiding language that reinforces negative stereotypes and using language that is respectful and inclusive of all individuals regardless of their
background. Using a consistent tone, style, and design is very important.

18 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

PHILOSOPHY, VISION AND GOAL OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Philosophy
All learners can communicate clearly, confidently and fluently in English through an interactive environment, use information and ideas in language in practical ways across disciplines, the world of work and/or further study.
Vision
Learners capable of communicating effectively and critically analysing texts in the world of work and further study.
Goal
To equip learners with the relevant knowledge in the use of English, 21st century skills and competencies necessary to succeed in an interactive environment and the world of work.
Contextual Issues
The process of developing an English curriculum that transforms the learning of English Language at the pre-tertiary level of Ghana's education system, with special regard to Secondary Education, requires a guide that provides general instructions and suggests step-by-step procedures for teaching and learning the subject.The experience from teaching English in the Ghanaian context reveals that major issues that confront teachers and learners of the subject are the lack of opportunity to teach and learn the English language and literature in an interactive and explorative classroom where issues of inclusion, differentiation, progression and duplication are addressed. Teachers need guidance on how to teach a curriculum that will develop the skills and competencies of learners to progress into further study, the world of work and adult life. For instance, the current English curriculum for SHS has the following barriers: · Inadequate technological resources · Low reading interest in learners due to lack of adequate exposure

· Unavailability of relevant reading materials · Content not reflecting relevant issues · Learners enter JHS and SHS with low linguistic or literacy experience which
impacts negatively on their ability to learn or read · Inadequate attention for learners with special education needs e.g., dyslexia,
dysgraphia, etc. The other barriers include: v Misconceptions and biases e.g.
· English Language is for girls · It is a difficult language · It should not be studied because it is spoken by everybody · Cultural biases · Everybody is considered competent to teach English language v L1 interference in the learning of English v Lack of innovative teaching strategies v Unmotivated learners v Large class size (in some cases) v Sub-standard English Language spoken by parents and caregivers to their wards. v It has become the Language on the streets and in the media.
Rationale
English, as the main medium of instruction will enhance the competence of learners in their academic performance, the use of higher order thinking skills and communication skills.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 19

ENGLISH LANGUAGE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT PANEL

WRITERS

Name

Institution

1. Dr. Brain Akrong

University of Professional Studies, Accra

2. Dr. Joyce Anku

University of Ghana

3. Margaret Gifty Bassah Achimota School

4. Ama Nyarko Marfo

Awutu Winton Senior High School

5. Alfred Quaittoo

Kaneshie Senior High Technical School

6. Kukua Andoh Robertson Achimota School

7. Comfort Dorvlo

Accra College of Education

REVIEWERS

Name

Institution

1. Dr.Abraham Okrah

University of Ghana

2. Richard Adjei

Retired Educationist

CURRICULUM WRITING GUIDE TEAM

Name

Institution

1. Prof.Winston Abroampa Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology

2. Cosmos Eminah

University of Education,Winneba

3. Aaron Akwaboah

Ministry of Education

4. Evans Odei

Achimota School

5. Paul Michael Cudjoe

Prempeh College

6. Ahmed Amihere

University of Education,Winneba

TRIALLING TEAM

Name

Institution

1. Imoro Salifu

Dagbon State Senior High Technical School

2. Mohammed Adam

Dagbon State Senior High Technical School

3. Fuseini Hamza

Tamale Girls Senior High School

4. Abudu Mahama Fuseini Tamale Girls Senior High School

5. Issah Zulkaleni

Kalpohin Senior High School

6. Laari Ali

Kalpohin Senior High School

NaCCA TEAM

1. Prof. K. O. Kwarteng

12. Bridget Anku

2. Prof. Edward Appiah

13. Anthony Sarpong

3. Mr. Matthew Owusu

14. Seth Nii Nartey

4. Reginald Quartey

15. Kenneth Wontumi

5. Joana Vanderpuije

16. Sharon Antwi-Baah

6. Anita Collison

17. Dennis Adjasi

7. Rebecca Abu Gariba

18. Ogyampo S.Amankwah

8. Genevieve Mensah

19. Abigail Owusu Oduro

9. Veronica Odom

20. Priscilla B. Plange

10. Joachim Seyram Honu 21. Abigail Birago Owusu

11. Dr. Mercy Nyamekye

22. Uriah Otoo

EXTERNAL QUALITY ASSURANCE TEAM

1. Prof. Kwame Akyeampong 4. Dr. Esinam Avornyo

2. Dr. Jane Cullen

5. Dr. Christopher Yaw Kwaah

3. Dr. Sean Higgins

20 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

SCOPE AND SEQUENCE

SHS English Language Summary

S/N STRAND

SUB-STRAND

1 Oral Language
2 Reading 3 Grammar
4 Writing
5 Literature Total

English Speech Sounds Listening Comprehension Conversation/Communication in Context Reading Comprehension Summarising Grammar Usage Vocabulary Punctuation and Capitalization Production and Distribution of Text Texts Types and Purposes Building and Presenting Knowledge Narrative, Drama, Poetry

YEAR 1 CS LO LI 1 13 1 12 1 12 1 23 1 12 2 5 11 1 12 1 12 2 23 2 26 1 11 1 56 15 23 43

YEAR 2 CS LO LI 126 112 112 115 111 336 111 --223 225 111 233 16 19 34

YEAR 3 CS LO LI 112 112 112 123 113 445 112 --111 223 111 112 15 16 25

Overall Totals (SHS 1 ­ 3)

Content Standards

46

Learning Outcomes

58

Learning Indicators

102

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 21

YEAR ONE
22 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
1. ENGLISH SPEECH SOUNDS

Learning Outcomes

21st Century Skills and Competencies

1.1.1.LO.1 Articulate English pure vowel and consonant sounds effectively in oral communication.

Communication and Collaboration: · All learners have the opportunity to speak in their groups with
clarity and confidence. They share ideas and take feedback. · Through pair/group activities, learners cultivate team spirit and
work collaboratively, by sharing ideas and receiving feedback.

Creativity and Innovation: Learners creatively blend different speech sounds to form meaningful words.

Critical thinking and Problem Solving: Learners become critical of sound combinations that result in meaningful words. This will guide them to be critical in articulating their thoughts and use words appropriately in speech.

GESI1, SEL2 and Shared National Values
GESI: Working together as a team and sharing ideas leads to a learning environment which promote: · gender equality and social inclusion. · respect for individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · gendered language use in school,
homes and communities. · awareness of personal linguistic
stereotypes and biases. · creating a conducive environment that
supports the needs of every learner.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through: · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in
diverse communicative settings. · learning to interact with others in
meaningful and positive ways, which

1 Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 2 Socio-Emotional Learning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 23

24 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

Content Standards
1.1.1.CS.1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of speech sounds in oral communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.1.1.LI.1 Use pure vowel sounds (short vowels) in connected speech.
Collaborative Learning: Working in mixed-ability groups, learners identify short vowel sounds in sample texts and use them in connected speech. E.g. 1. In pairs/groups, learners listen to and identify the English short vowels (e.g. //, / e/, //, / /, //, //, / /) in sample-spoken texts (e.g. tape recordings, podcast, radio, read aloud exercises, tongue twisters, YouTube videos on vowel sounds etc.). Learners pay attention to the unique qualities of each sound.
Listening Challenge Game: In groups, learners listen to a pair of words and identify the words with short vowels. E.g. ship/sheep, cart/cut, cot/court, pull/pool

Assessment
1.1.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Group Work: E.g. 2 In mixed-ability groups, learners articulate short vowels (e.g. //, / e/, //, / /, //, //, / /) accurately in connected speech.

Conversations/Interviews: In pairs and groups, learners use short vowel sounds in words and connected speech through conversations/interviews, skits (short plays), etc.
1.1.1.LI.2 Use pure vowel sounds (long vowels) in connected speech.
Collaborative Learning: · Working in teams (groups/pairs), learners identify long vowel sounds (e.g. /i/, /i:/, /3:/, / a/, /:/, /u/)
in sample- spoken texts (e.g.: audio-recordings, read aloud exercises, podcasts, vodcasts, YouTube videos on vowel sounds, etc). · Learners then use long vowel sounds accurately in words and in connected speech through conversations, interviews, skits (short plays), etc.
Sort the Words: Learners, in their groups, sort words with short or long vowels from a set of word cards. Learners first group the words according to whether the vowel sounds are long or short. Second, learners read the words out with the correct pronunciation.

1.1.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 25

Teaching and Learning Resources

1.1.1.LI.3

1.1.1.AS.3

Use consonant sounds in connected speech (Plosives, Fricatives and Nasals).
Collaborative Learning: · Working in teams to solve problems e.g., peer/pair work, group work: Learners identify and use
plosive, fricative and nasal sounds. · In pairs/groups, learners listen to and identify plosives (e.g., /p, b, t/) in sample-spoken texts (e.g.:
tape recordings, podcast, radio, read aloud exercises, tongue twisters, YouTube videos on vowel sounds etc.). · Learners use plosives accurately in words and in connected speech through conversations, interviews, skits (short plays), etc. · In pairs/groups, learners listen to and identify fricatives (e.g., /s/, / z/, / /, / đ/) in sample-spoken texts (e.g.: tape recordings, podcast, radio, read aloud exercises, tongue twisters, YouTube videos on English consonant sounds, etc.) · Learners use fricatives accurately in words and in connected speech through conversations, interviews, skits (short plays), etc. · In pairs/groups, learners listen to and identify nasals (e.g. /m/, /n/, //) in sample-spoken texts (e.g.: tape recordings, podcast, radio, read aloud exercises, tongue twisters, YouTube videos on English consonants, etc). Learners use nasals accurately in words and in connected speech through conversations, interviews, skits (short plays), etc.

Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

· Audio recordings · Visual aids such as sound charts (i.e. sounds in different
colour backgrounds), pictures, props, regalia, etc. · Minimal pair aids · Materials such as pictures or books with speech sounds,
audio dictionaries

· Audio-visual aids e.g. YouTube videos, television, etc. · https://www.speechactive.com/english-vowel-ipa-
international-phonetic-alphabet · Alphabetic code chart · Skits (short plays), scenarios, etc.

26 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
2. LISTENING COMPREHENSION

Learning Outcomes
1.1.2.LO.1 Extract key ideas from oral texts/communication using relevant listening skills and learner strategies.

21st Century Skills and Competencies
Communication and Collaboration: · Learners develop good collaborative skills in communicating with
others by listening to them as they share ideas and take feedback. · Learners develop effective listening skills by engaging in all forms of
communication including electronic communicative activities, games etc. · Listening fosters friendship, teamwork and collaboration, which ultimately result in improved communication skills.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · The learners' ability to make an informed judgement based on the
information received, extract relevant portions and act upon them requires critical thinking and problem-solving skills. · Learners develop critical thinking and analytical skills as they deduce relevant information from selected texts.
Digital Literacy: By listening to recordings and podcasts and ensuring that all learners are actively involved, their digital literacy skills are enhanced.

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values
GESI: Collaborating in a team in an inclusive way, communicating well with one another and giving listening ears to each other leads to: · peaceful coexistence among
different religions, cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · unity among learners and others in different situations.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · tolerating one another in a group
as they speak and listen to one another. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions in different communication environments. · negotiating conflicts constructively in discussions. · sharing opinions noticing the facial expressions and posture of others

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 27

28 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

in communicating well with one another.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, openmindedness, patience, hard work, humility

Content Standards
1.1.2.CS.1 Demonstrate the ability to listen critically, extract and construct varied levels of meaning from any oral communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.1.2.LI.1 Recognise the main ideas in level-appropriate oral texts.
Think-Pair-Share Activity (e.g., Peer/pair work, small group work): Learners listen to a level appropriate oral text (audio recordings, videos, stories, narrations, etc.) and discuss the main ideas in pairs. Selected texts should reflect varied cultural backgrounds, values, interests and affiliations.

Learners collaborate and communicate their ideas in a cordial manner. Learners may do this by deliberating on the following questions: · What is/are the speaker(s) referring to? · What does/do the speaker(s) want me to know? Etc. · What did you learn from the passage (e.g.: theme, character, moral lesson)? · What are the key ideas in the text? · What will you suggest as a suitable title for the text and why?

Example 2 Learners, individually or in pairs: · Identify the key information from the oral text/communication. · Summarise in their own words what the text is about by focusing on the key ideas identified. · Suggest a suitable title for the narrative.

Example 3 Learners role-play the passage to reinforce the lesson.
1.1.2.LI.2 Differentiate between important ideas and unimportant ideas in level appropriate oral texts.

Experiential Learning: · Learners talk about their experiences relating to information presented in an oral text, reflect on
the ideas and distinguish between the more and less important ideas in the text.

Assessment
1.1.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning
1.1.2.AS.2 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 29

· Through this, learners develop an enquiry-based approach to continuous learning.
Use strategies such as: Word chain (i.e., repetition of similar words or sequences), sorting of word cards, group work to differentiate the main ideas from the subsidiary ones.

Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Example: · In groups, learners sort important and less important information written on sheets of paper. · Learners discuss why some ideas are considered as main ideas and others as less important
information.

Note: · Pay attention to the beginning and end of a conversation. · Pay attention to paralinguistic features (tone of voice, stressed/unstressed words) and non-verbal cues
(gestures, facial expressions, etc.). · Pay attention to speakers' use of descriptive terms and examples (e.g. Explanation, illustrations, statistical
information, endless adjectives and adverbs), which normally introduce subsidiary ideas in communication. · Pay attention to speaking cues (e.g. Today we will focus on..., the story is about..., Let's move on to..., In
other words..., the result of this is..., etc.).

Teaching and

· Audio recordings (e.g. online stories, teacher recorded texts, etc.)

Learning Resources · Book extracts or reading passages for read aloud activities

· Podcasts (e.g.: Lyrics Training, Listening Notes, Accent Rosie, Teach Videos, etc.)

30 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
3. CONVERSATION/COMMUNICATION IN CONTEXT

Learning Outcomes 1.1.3.LO.1 Employ appropriate register to communicate competently in varied speech contexts.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners communicate confidently and effectively to different
participants in different social context using the registers acquired in conversation lessons. · Through pair or group discussions, learners collaborate with one another using the right choice of words in their everyday discourse. This helps to avoid interpersonal conflicts that arise when using interpreted language.
Leadership Skills: · Learners develop leadership skills and team spirit through
role-play. · Learners use desired language in motivating and mobilising
others.
Cultural Identity: Learners develop their cultural identity and relevance through communicative strategies they encounter in varied speech contexts.
Creativity and Innovation: Learners are able to create and innovate language in given speech contexts.

GESI: Collaborating and communicating well in a team in an inclusive way, leads to: · peaceful coexistence among different
religions, cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · building and maintaining healthy social relationships. · good team spirit and unity among learners in diverse communication settings. SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · tolerating one another in a group as they communicate and collaborate with one another. · learn from others and respect one another's views and opinions in diverse speech context. · understanding, relating to and being sensitive to others' choice of words in both academic and social discourses.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 31

Content Standards
1.1.3.CS.1 Demonstrate effective use of communicative strategies in a variety of speech situations.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.1.3.LI.1 Use language appropriately in different speech situations (e.g., formal and informal).
Talk for learning (TfL): · Learners, in mixed-ability groups, engage in practical demonstrations of everyday discourse and
group conversations around a particular topic to enable them, collaboratively, identify and use specific registers and expressions. · E.g., Group discussions on the impact of Covid-19 on students' academic life or asking for direction, requesting a favour, describing a market scene, attending a job interview, asking questions in class, etc. Selected topics should appeal to learners from diverse backgrounds (ethnic, religious, cultural) and involve both males and females.

Assessment
1.1.3.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Class Activity: · Learners watch short videos/read short stories based on a given speech context (e.g., formal, semi-
formal or informal contexts). · In small groups, exhibiting the values of tolerance through exploratory talk, learners discuss a
video/story, give reasons for what participants in the video or story said and compile a list of useful expressions used in the video/story.

Learners may use discussion topics such as: · What is happening in the video/story? · Who are the participants? · Who are the intended audience of the video/story? · Where is the conversation taking place? · What lesson is the video/story teaching us?

Learners then role-play the video/story, paying attention to the language/ communicative strategies employed by the characters.

32 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

1.1.3.LI.2 Employ speech acts in different speech situations to express various social functions (e.g. requests, advice-giving, offer, apology, praise, acceptance, refusal, etc.).
Talk for Learning: · Learners, working in gender sensitive, mixed-ability and mixed-cultural groups, discuss short
scenarios on given speech acts (e.g., giving advice, apology, etc.). · Learners in their groups then role-play the short scenario on a given speech act. · Through a class discussion, learners discuss their choices in terms of appropriate ways of
expressing the acts (direct/indirect) and their responses to the speech acts.

1.1.3.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

Note: Ensure all learners participate and tolerate opinions of one another.

· Short passages or stories (e.g., page turners)
· Visuals · Audio tapes

· Audio-visuals · Conversation practice
games

· Wall pictures about different scenes
· Audio visuals about a particular situation or profession

· Short drama or role-play by two or more characters
· Learner/Teacher generated short scenarios

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 33

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
2. READING
1. READING COMPREHENSION

Learning Outcomes 1.2.1.LO.1 Employ knowledge of reading and text comprehension strategies to retrieve and interpret different kinds of texts.

21st Century Skills and Competencies
Information Literacy Skills: Learners engage with materials from social media to search for specific information.
Collaboration and Communication: Learners work in pairs/mixed ability groups to scan, skim and closely read and interpret a variety of short texts.
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving: Learners develop critical thinking and problem-solving skills through critically examining a variety of texts (e.g., social media, biographies, etc.) for the gist of the story and for comprehension.

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and can: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about
gender and language use in their homes and communities. · make texts gender-responsive in terms of language and characters.

Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners enhance their leadership and personal development skills
as they work collaboratively in groups and play the roles of leaders and the led. · Learners acquire presentation skills as they partake in presenting their groups' findings in class.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · developing relationships that make learners
sensitive to one another's feelings. · interacting with others in meaningful ways.
· accepting responsibility for their actions. · accepting roles and responsibilities that help
learners develop leadership skills.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

34 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

1.2.1.LO.2 Employ knowledge of text comprehension strategies to read for enjoyment and information.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners work together and can contribute their ideas and accept
others' views. · Learners tolerate and appreciate the views of others.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: Learners develop critical thinking and problem-solving skills through critically examining a variety of texts (e.g., social media, biographies, etc.) for the gist of the story and by application of predictive strategies to respond to reading texts.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and can: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.
· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.

Leadership roles should be played by both male and female members of the groups to help learners develop the ability to challenge traditional gender roles.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · developing relationships that make learners
sensitive to others' feelings. · writing collaboratively. · interacting with others in meaningful ways. · accepting responsibility for their actions. · accepting roles and responsibilities that help
learners develop leadership skills.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 35

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
36 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
1.2.1.CS.1 Demonstrate understanding of different types of reading and text comprehension strategies and use them to interpret a variety of appropriate level texts.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 1.2.1.LI.1 Retrieve specific information and interpret a variety of simple texts.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Learners work collaboratively in pairs and mixed ability groups to glance through short stories with simple texts (including texts from social media) for specific information (date of birth, place of birth, keywords etc.) while tolerating and respecting one another's views.
Talk for Learning Approaches (TFL): e.g., Brainstorming, talking circles, partner talk, think-pairshare, etc.

Assessment
1.2.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Skimming: · In convenient mixed gender/ability groups, learners collaborate to survey texts for the general
idea. · Learners use features such as title of a story, illustrations (e.g., pictures), boldface words,
headings and subheadings, topic sentences and concluding sentences of paragraphs (first and last paragraphs) to critically examine a variety of texts (e.g., social media, biographies, etc.) by examining them for the gist of the story. · Learners use questions at the end of texts to derive the gist of the text. · Learners read and interpret texts from familiar backgrounds and connect the messages of the texts to their personal lives. · In groups, learners download (or search newspapers for) positive stories from social media about familiar and popular personalities in the country e.g., musicians, political leaders, etc. and use the text to practise scanning and skimming in class.

Close Reading Initiating Talk for Learning: · In groups, learners work collaboratively to closely read, examine and interpret level appropriate
short texts. · Learners work collaboratively in pairs to interpret a variety of texts using a combination of the
three reading strategies i.e., scan, skim and close read texts.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 37

1.2.1.LI.2 Use a variety of text comprehension strategies to analyse fiction and non-fiction texts.
Think-Pair-Share/Group Work: · In pairs/groups, learners discuss the importance of prediction in real life situations (e.g., If in a
picture, somebody is dressed in all black, what does it imply?) and link it with its role in enhancing reading comprehension. · Learners listen to a simple but interesting texts read aloud to them and try to make logical predictions at the beginning, middle, and end of the text (fiction). Learners support their predictions with evidence from the text. · In mixed ability reading groups (of not more than five members), learners work collaboratively under their group leaders to read other interesting texts. At breaking points (created by the teacher or the group leaders), learners predict, review and re-predict the story till they come to an end. · Learners support their predictions with evidence from the text. · Groups choose delegates to present their work to the class. Learners are encouraged to value and accept every member's role. · Learners critically critique/peer review each group's presentation. · Model how to fill the prediction forms and ask learners to fill the forms at the beginning, middle and end of the texts (showing their initial predictions, the revised as well as the refined ones). · Learners work collaboratively to use titles, illustrations, bold print, italics, headings, subheadings and other text features to predict non-fiction texts. · Leadership roles should be assigned to both male and female members.

1.2.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Learners use KWL, DRTA and chunking strategies to interpret advanced texts.

Know, Want-to-know, and Learned (KWL) · Learners work in mixed gender and mixed ability groups to brainstorm what they know and
want to know about titles of given texts. · Learners fill the K and W columns of the KWL sheet with information from the brainstorming
exercise. (Points under W should be stated in a question form)

38 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· Learners read the text and then in groups, fill their L column with what they have learned about the topic. The groups present what they have on their KWL sheets to the class explaining what happened at each stage of the reading.
· (E.g., At the beginning, we knew ... about the topic and we wanted to know... about it. · Now we have learnt that....... are.........).
Directed Reading Thinking Activity (DRTA)/Chunking: · Breaking texts into smaller parts for easier reading and comprehension of learners. · Using probing questions, learners' background knowledge about the title of a text is activated
and they predict what the text will be about. · At the reading stage, learners read the text in small sections (a paragraph, a page, etc.). · At the end of each chunk, questions are asked and if learners cannot answer correctly, they are
directed to re-read portions of the text, which are related to the answer. · Learners are left to work in pairs to locate the answer.
Additional Metacognitive Practices: · Learners read text and use text markers (metacognitive markers) to indicate, in the margin of
the text, their impressions about parts of the text [e.g., This is important, confusing, surprising, funny, etc.] · Learners use a second reading to circle/write down two (or at most three) unknown words and try to find their meanings in context. · Learners finally read the text and underline ideas in the text that relate to other texts, their personal lives, or some experience elsewhere in the world. · Learners read and re-read portions of given texts to answer comprehension questions based on the text. · Learners can be encouraged to create mental pictures of what is read and use them to aid their understanding of the text as they answer different levels of comprehension questions (that are based on the text). · Learners work in groups to apply their knowledge of metacognitive strategies like KWL, DRA and DRTA/Chunking of texts to enhance their comprehension of the given texts. · Groups share their work with the class and critique one another's work.
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 39

Teaching and Learning Resources

1.2.1.LI.3 Read a variety of texts for enjoyment.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · In mixed ability/gender reading groups, learners listen to a scenario on the importance of reading
and discuss the message of the text. · Learners also identify and discuss common reading misconceptions (wrong impressions which
people hold about reading). Building on What Others Say: · In mixed ability/gender groups, learners listen to the teacher read an interesting story aloud up
to where it is becoming most interesting (i.e. climax). Teacher stops there and in smaller groups, learners discuss what is read and predict how the story will end. · Learners work in groups collaboratively to read the rest of the story. · Under the leadership of the group leader, learners do interactive activities (dramatise, draw, mind map, etc.) to retell the story. · Learners read texts from familiar backgrounds for enjoyment and share the moral values that could be drawn from the story with the class. Continue to read with learners this way till they begin to show interest in independent reading.

1.2.1.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning

A collection of texts from social media: · Passages across the various subject areas (on themes that learners can find interesting). · Books or articles from social media, newspapers, magazines, etc., speeches from personalities, etc. · A variety of texts for practising prediction, using KWL, DRA, DRTA/Chunking strategies · Biographies and short stories on interesting topics · Prediction sheets (Anchor Charts) · Videos on reading · Skits/short plays

40 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
2. READING
3. SUMMARISING

Learning Outcomes 1.2.2.LO.1 Employ summarisation as a technique for text interpretation.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Collaboration and Communication: · Learners work together to contribute and accept ideas or
feedback from others. · Learners work together to identify main ideas in paragraphs. · Learners communicate meaningfully with an audience.
Cultural Identity: Learners develop their cultural identity through engagement with carefully selected videos and texts.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners enhance their critical thinking skills by isolating
important ideas from less important ones. · Learners acquire the skill of evaluation, which can be transferred
to other spheres of learning. · Learners critically analyse texts by applying the SWBST strategy
to summarise them.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and can: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of
the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life. · make interesting videos/stories and give positive information on characters devoid of stereotyped language.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · developing relationships that make learners
sensitive to others' feelings. · writing collaboratively. · interacting with others in meaningful ways. · accepting responsibility for their actions. · accepting roles and responsibilities that help
learners develop leadership skills.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 41

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
42 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
1.2.2.CS.1 Demonstrate in-depth understanding of summarising as a technique for text comprehension.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 1.2.2.LI.1 Analyse and retell orally the main parts of stories from short videos, drama, texts, etc.
Initiating Talk for Learning: · Learners discuss and summarise stories by retelling their main parts. · Learners watch a number of short plays/videos or read short stories in class.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · Learners think about the stories in the video/play/text critically and work collaboratively in small
mixed ability/gender groups to relate only the main parts of the story to somebody who did not watch the play/video or read the text. · Groups write the story on a flip chart and post them on the classroom walls for a gallery walk (i.e., the class takes a walk round the classroom to read and appreciate the finished assignments that are posted on the walls): · Learners work together to critique each group's work, giving positive feedback to help learners develop the skills of appreciating the different competencies in individuals within the groups. · Award marks to motivate learners and make this exercise very interesting.

Assessment
1.2.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Talk for Learning: · Learners do several activities to help them identify the main idea in texts (paragraphs). · In small groups, learners discuss what the given pictures (e.g., pictures of festivals and other
celebrations, football matches, etc.) are about. · Use probing questions to get learners to talk about things that help them to know what the picture
is about.

Think-Pair-Share: · Learners work in pairs to examine paragraphs critically to find out how each supporting sentence is
connected to the main idea (e.g., by giving explanations and examples in support of what is said in the main idea, etc.). · Texts should come from different sources including social media and Core Literature textbooks.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 43

44 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

1.2.2.LI.2 Apply innovative strategies in summarising short but familiar stories.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Learners use the SWBST Strategy to summarise a variety of short fiction (prose and drama).
Note: SWBST means: S___ Somebody W___Wants B___But S___So T___Then

1.2.2.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

In small mixed ability and mixed gender groups, learners listen to a story read aloud to the class. They work collaboratively to summarise the story heard by critically discussing and answering the following SWBST questions: · Somebody: Who is the main character of the narrative? · Want: What does the main character want or want to do? · But: What is the problem? Or Why can't the main character get what she or he wants? · So: How does the main character solve the problem? · Then: What was the resolution?

In mixed-ability/mixed gender groups, learners apply the SWBST strategy to familiar stories (e.g., Cinderella story). · Encourage learners to tolerate and accept one another's views as well as connect the stories to
their personal lives, learning to identify social injustice and advocating for change.

The 5Ws Learners use "The 5Ws" strategy: Who, When, Where, Why and How to summarise stories. · In groups/ in pairs, learners work on given texts, responding to the 5Ws. There could be 5 groups;
each responding to one `W'. Ensure that each group can work on all the paragraphs in the passage. · Selected texts should be gender responsive and reflect cultural settings that learners can identify
with in their discussions.

Teaching and Learning Resources

· A collection of interesting videos from the media · Collection of texts across the various subject areas and
Core literature books (on themes that learners can find interesting). · Flip charts, markers

· A variety of short but interesting texts (prose and drama) for practising summarisation.
· Stories /texts · Copies of newspaper cuttings, etc.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 45

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
3. GRAMMAR USAGE
1. GRAMMAR

Learning Outcomes 1.3.1.LO.1 Apply knowledge of word classes and their functions in communication.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners exhibit the ability to communicate with peers
with confidence. · Learners develop the ability to collaborate and work in
teams. · Learners develop tolerance for one another.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners develop the potential of taking up
responsibilities. · Learners develop self-confidence as they lead others
through role- play and other group activities.
Creativity and Innovation: · Learners develop the knowledge and skills of creativity
and innovation in communication. · Learners use language creatively in varied contexts.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners develop the ability to use appropriate language
in solving problems such as settling of disputes. · Learners use appropriate language to promote peaceful
co-existence.
Digital Literacy: · Learners develop their digital literacy skills by consulting
the Internet for appropriate grammatical usage.

GESI: Learning in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion will lead to: · respect for individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embracing diversity and practising inclusion. · examining and dispelling misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogating stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities. · being sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings · negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others.

46 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

1.3.1.LO.2 Distinguish between and use the parts and elements that make up a sentence.

· Learners develop literacy skills as they interact with

· learning to interact with others in meaningful

technological tools such as video games, podcasts, among

and positive ways, which can lead to a

others.

reduction in selfish behaviours.

· tolerating one another in a group as they play

and learn.

· accepting responsibility for one's own actions

and inactions.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners are able to communicate meaningfully with an
audience. · Learners avoid ambiguity when communicating with
others. · Learners develop tolerance for one another in
communication.
Critical Thinking: · Learners are able to listen critically and evaluate what
others say. · Learners develop the skills of inference and the ability to
deduce the import of a statement.
Creativity and Innovation: · Learners enhance their potentials in the appropriate
choice of words to function properly in their learning and in the world of work. · Learners creatively compose their thoughts and model them into acceptable statements in varied contexts.

GESI: Learning in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion, collaborating in teams and sharing ideas to: · consciously develop respect for individuals of
different linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths
about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities. · being sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 47

1.3.1.LO.3 Distinguish between and use compound and complex sentences.

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners respond adequately to situations that require
language use such as motivating others and pacifying parties in an arbitration.
Communication and Collaboration: · Learners communicate confidently with peers and other
people in the larger society. · Learners tolerate one another as they work in groups. · Learners use language effectively in school and in the
society. Creativity and Innovation: · Learners enhance their creative ability by varying
different types of sentences in communication. · Learners creatively plan and organise communicative
activities in public speaking effectively. · Learners creatively use ideas acquired in grammar in
effective interpersonal communication.

· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings
· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Working in collaborative ways in an environment that promotes gender equality and social inclusion will ensure; · respect for other individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embracing diversity and practice inclusion. · the examination and dispel of misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogation of stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, Social and Emotional Learning Strategies must be consciously

48 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

1.3.1.LO.4 Distinguish between and use dependent and independent clauses.

Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners identify and support the capabilities of their
peers and others in the world of work and in adult life. · Learners take responsibility of their own learning both in
school and in the world of work.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners extend the skill of analysing sentences to the
analysis of issues in society. · Learners provide solutions to societal problems using
suitable language.
Digital Literacy: · Learners enhance their digital literacy skills by utilising
the Internet to support their communication skills. · Learners develop literacy skills as they apply
technological tools in their learning. E.g: using video games, podcasts, and others.
Communication and Collaboration: · Learners demonstrate confidence in communicating with
their peers and in the world of work. · Learners develop the ability to collaborate and work in
teams. · Learners develop tolerance for others.
Creativity and Innovation: · Learners' creative ability is enhanced by employing the
knowledge of varying types of sentences in communication.

integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings · negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Critically thinking and problem-solving Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion will lead to: · respect for individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embracing diversity and practice inclusion. · examining and dispelling of misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogating stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 49

· Learners creatively plan and organise communicative activities in public speaking effectively.
· Learners creatively use ideas acquired in effective interpersonal communication.

· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.
· managing others emotional behaviour to promote learning.

Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners are able to identify situations when their peers might need support or assistance. · Learners are able to articulate their thoughts in a group easily.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners are able to think rationally and clearly in solving problems. · Learners are ready to seek additional information to build understanding.
Digital Literacy: Learners leverage on the use of ICT tools in communication to improve upon their performance in other life situations.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings
· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

1.3.1.LO.5 Compose texts using phrase types.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners are able to follow and participate in group
discussions and express opinions explicitly. · Learners actively participate in varied interactive
situations in the larger society.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Through creativity and innovation, learning in an environment that promotes gender equality and social inclusion ensures: · accepting responsibility for one's own actions
and inactions

50 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· Learners tolerate the views of others and find appropriate language to suggest corrections while working in groups.
Creativity and Innovation: · Learners develop creativity and innovation in
communication. · Learners apply language creatively in various contexts. · Learners creatively use ideas acquired in the learning of
grammar in effective interpersonal communication.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners exhibit desirable leadership skills that would
build lasting relationships and contribute to their professional success. · Learners identify and support the capabilities of their peers and others in the world of work, and in adult life. · Learners take responsibility of their own learning both in school and in the world of work.
Critical thinking and Problem Solving: Learners identify their communication challenges and transform them into strengths that establish their competence in dealing with others.
Digital Literacy: · Learners become proficient in managing ICT tools in the
world work. · Learners' use of ICT tools opens opportunities for them
in the world of work.

· respect for individuals of different linguistic backgrounds.
· embracing diversity and practising inclusion. · examining and dispelling misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogating stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities. · being sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life. · recognising ones behaviour and making an informed judgement.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings. · negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 51

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
52 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
1.3.1.CS.1 Demonstrate knowledge, understanding and use of grammatical forms in speech and writing.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 1.3.1.LI.1 Use nouns accurately in speech and writing.
Brainstorming: Learners work in mixed ability groups ensuring collaboration and respecting one another's views to identify nouns in context and use them in speech and writing.
Task-Based Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups brainstorm the concept of nouns, encouraging one another to define and give examples taking into consideration their cultural backgrounds.
Think-Pair-Share: Learners use previous examples given in the brainstorming session to identify the noun forms as they think in pairs and share ideas, supporting the involvement of all.

Assessment
1.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Group Work: Learners in mixed ability groups collaboratively classify nouns from selected passages into noun types/forms. Forms/Types of Nouns: · Common Nouns E.g.: chair, book etc. · Proper Nouns E.g.: Adwoa, Musa, Ghana, Lake Volta, Canada etc. · Concrete Nouns E.g. Window, projector, computer, bottle etc. · Abstract Nouns E.g. Love, kindness, honesty etc. · Count Nouns E.g. Pen-Pens, book-books, boy-boys, girl-girls etc. · Non-Count Nouns E.g. Water, oil, sugar etc. · Collective Nouns E.g. Children, family, police, clergy etc. Note: Teacher guides learners to identify regular and irregular nouns. E.g.

Regular Pen/Pens
Dress/Dresses

Irregular Man/Men Ox/Oxen Sheep/Sheep

I have one ox - I have two oxen

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 53

54 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Genitive Forms of Nouns
Games:
· Learners in gender groupings use games to form genitives of nouns appropriately in speech and writing.
Examples: i. Building on What Others Say (chain game) ... `s' genitive:
ii. Adding `s' to regular nouns to show possession. E.g.: a) Akwasi's bag b) Fuseina's new bag c) Dzifanu's bowl
iii. Adding `s' to the genitive case in regular plural nouns. E.g.: a) The boys' dormitory b) The girls' house
iv. Adding `s' to the apostrophe/Adding the apostrophe to nouns ending in `s'. Eg: a) Abass' book b) Rawlings' c) James's bag d) Akos' new bag
v. Adding `of' to the noun phrase. E.g.: a) The title of the poem
Conversation Drills: Using conversation drills, learners (in pairs, groups, whole class, dialogues etc) use the `s' genitive and the `of' form in sentences.
KWL (What I know-What I want to know- What I have Learnt): Learners play the KWL game in their mixed ability pairs to identify and use plural noun forms in selected passages/texts ensuring collaboration and respect for one another's views.

Example: Learner A: K - river + s = rivers

W - Examples of nouns that neither adds `s' nor change their form = people, sheep L - I have learnt that not all nouns form plural by adding 's'
1.3.1.LI.2 Use pronoun types accurately in speech and writing.
Experiential Learning: · Using role-play ensuring tolerance for one another's views, learners work in mixed ability groups
collaborating and communicating verbally and non-verbally to identify pronoun types. · Learners in their mixed ability groups creatively explore the use of pronouns from varieties of
texts respecting varieties of views.
1. Personal Pronoun E.g. I, you, she, he, it, we, they, me, us, them.

1.3.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

2. Possessives E.g. mine, yours, his, hers, ours, theirs

3. Relative pronouns E.g. who, whom, which, what, that

4. Interrogatives E.g. who, whom, what, which, whose

5. Reflexives E.g. myself, yourself, itself, herself, himself, ourselves, themselves

6. Demonstratives E.g. this, that, these, those

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 55

56 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

1.3.1.LI.3 Use various forms of Adjectives correctly in contexts.
Building on What Others Say: Learners in pairs discuss the varied use of words to describe their favourite food/friend/teacher/ and other items around them.
Collaborative Learning: Learners jigsaw with cross groupings collaboratively to explore the accurate use of adjectives in contexts using selected texts.
Examples of use of adjectives in contexts: i. Directly before nouns. E.g. Amuzu is an amazing footballer. ii. With the verb "to be" to describe the subject of the sentence. E.g. Fatima is very intelligent. iii. Use of adjectives with sense (sensory) verbs (sight, taste, smell, touch, hearing). E.g. The food
tastes awful. Or iv. Verbs of appearance to modify the nouns, which come before the verb. E.g. Papa Minka seemed very upset.

1.3.1.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

NOTE: · Draw attention to comparative and superlative forms of Adjectives · Order of Adjectives in contexts; minor to, superior to, inferior to etc.
1.3.1.LI.4 Use forms of verbs in everyday activities (Tense & Aspects).
Experiential Learning: Using role-play ensuring tolerance for one another's views, learners discuss activities they engage in everyday by identifying all the various inflections of the forms of verbs
Examples: i. Base(V) infinitive - , sit, buy -s form...3rd person + V). Eg: sit - sits, buy ­ buys ii. Past -ed1­ called, drank Participle (V + ing) ­ calling, drinking Participle (V + ed2) ­ called, drunk iii. Regular ­ talk, want, advise, weed, etc. iv. Irregular ­ come, eat, go, get, say, write, etc. v. Use verbs correctly in appropriate tense forms:

1.3.1.AS.4 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

· Present Tense · Simple Present Tense · Present Progressive · Present Perfect · Present Perfect Progressive · Past Tense · Simple Past Tense · Past Progressive · Past Perfect · Past Perfect Progressive

The primary auxiliaries are: do, have, be Use modal auxiliaries can/could; will/would, may/might; must, need, etc.

NOTE: · Use demonstration/role play/ dialogue to distinguish forms and other uses of Tense and Aspect · Explanation of relationship between time, tense and aspect. Forms of the Present Tense

1.3.1.LI.5 Use minor word classes in speaking and writing.
Experiential Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups, discuss the experiences of the use of conjunctions, prepositions and determiners on varied topics. Learners listen and share ideas supporting/ encouraging one another to identify the minor word classes and give examples.
i. Conjunction: Coordinating conjunctions. E.g. for, and, nor, but, or, yet, and so. ii. Correlative conjunctions. E.g. either.. or, neither.. nor, and not only.. but also. iii. Conjunctions to link ideas. E.g. because, since, as, although, though, while, and whereas. iv. Adverbs that function as conjunctions in sentences. E.g. until, after, or before. v. Preposition: Use prepositions in sentences.
a) E.g. consist of, in front of, on behalf of, in view of, in spite of, due to, near to, because of, by means of, by dint of (hard work), etc.
b) E.g.: He will succeed by dint of hard work. c) The man spoke on behalf of the group.

1.3.1.AS.5
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 57

Teaching and Learning Resources

Use complex prepositions to express: · Place Eg. near/close to, in front of, out of, far from, by the side of, etc. · Time E.g. in time of, about to, during the course of, at noon, for one week, etc · Reason E.g. due to, because of, on account of, as a result of, etc. · Concession E.g. in spite of, apart from etc.

· Determiners: Articles are the most popular types of determiners. E.g. definite article `the,' indefinite `a,' and `an.'
· Possessives provide context in a sentence by informing the reader what belongs to the subject, such as `our,' `your,' my,' `their,' `her,' and `his'. E.g. Her car is over there.
· Demonstratives (that, this, there, these, and those) identify an object based on its location. · Use determiners in sentences and paragraphs. E.g. That cat is very fat. An apple fell from the tree.
Is your coffee on the counter?

· Word/Sentence cards · Word Walls · Real objects and pictures · Selected passages · Teacher made passages · Technology tools such as computer, mobile phones,
projector, radio, TV, films and narratives etc. · Passages that reveal various forms of nouns.

· Varieties of narrative texts that reveal various types of pronouns.
· Pictures · Real objects. · Varieties of narrative texts that reveal use of adjectives in
context. · Videos with dialogue · Role-play · Varieties of narrative texts and Passages

58 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
1.3.1.CS.2 Demonstrate command of structural and functional use of sentences.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 1.3.1.LI.1 Identify and use Subject and Predicate in text.
Problem-Based Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups, work by communicating and collaborating through different tasks, listening to and sharing ideas with one another to identify the various parts of the sentence. The value of tolerance will be achieved as they work together.
Collaborative Learning: Learners critically and innovatively create texts (sentences and paragraphs) and use them to distinguish the elements of a sentence.
Group Work: Through think-pair-share, learners examine the composition of the Subject and Predicate parts of the sentence. E.g. 1. The Kwahu festival is here 2. Mensah plays well 3. All the students that came late were punished
1.3.1.LI.2 Analyse accurately the elements within the sentence.
Collaborative Learning: Learners work collaboratively in mixed ability groups to join appropriate clauses in analysing given sentences into the constituent elements. S. V. O. C. A. - Subject/ Verb/Object/Complement/Adjunct
Problem-Based Learning: Learners play games in their mixed ability groups using words/ sentence cards to identify the constituent elements and combine to form various patterns of sentences. Eg: SV - Mensa swims SVO - Fafa sells fruits SVOO - Amina gave me a gift. SVC - I will be a doctor SVOA, ASV, SVOC... ETC

Assessment
1.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning
1.3.1.AS.2 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 59

Group Work: Learners in their mixed ability groups construct sentences and indicate the types and functions : Simple , Compound, Complex, Compound - complex(Complete)

1.3.1.LI.3 Demonstrate command and use of compound sentences.
Experiential Learning: Learners in mixed groupings, discuss the experiences of the use of compound and complex sentences, on varied topics. Learners listen to and tolerate divergent views as well as share ideas supporting/ encouraging one another to identify and give examples of complex and compound sentences.
Project-Based Learning: Using a problem-solving approach, learners in mixed ability groups: i. Construct independent clauses (Simple sentences) respecting individual differences.
Example: Adamu arrived early. He enjoyed the party.
ii. Join two or more independent clauses (simple sentences) to form compound sentences using coordinating conjunctions (so, but, and, or etc.)

1.3.1.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

1.3.1.LI.4 Demonstrate command of Dependent and Independent Clauses appropriately in communication.
Talk for Learning Approaches (TfL): · Through teamwork and collaborative communication skills, learners in mixed ability groups
explore the use of independent and dependent clauses in varied contexts. · Learners watch YouTube videos for more examples. · Dependent clause is a part of a sentence that has subject and a verb but cannot stand alone as a
complete thought. · E.g.: Manu dropped the bottle because his hands were full. · Dependent clauses are introduced with subordinating conjunctions such as: because, before,
though, while, as, if, as if, who, that, where etc.

1.3.1.AS.4
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

60 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

Project-Based Learning: · Learners watch a recorded version of a renowned TV newscaster and apply in their mixed ability
groups to construct thematic narratives/ speeches with dependent and independent clauses to suit varied contexts. · Independent clause (main) is a group of words that contains a subject and a verb and expresses a complete thought. · E.g., Kafui studied in the lab for his Chemistry test.

NB: The Dependent (Subordinate) Clause depends on the main clause for completion and to make sense.
1.3.1.LI.5 Use phrase types accurately in context.
Experiential Learning: · Learners in mixed ability groups, identify phrase types in speech and texts. · Learners in their mixed ability groups, creatively construct sentences using phrase types while
tolerating divergent opinions.
Example of phrases include: i. Noun phrase ii. Verb phrase iii. Adjective/Relative phrase iv. Adverbial (adverb) phrase

1.3.1.AS.5
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Project-Based Learning: Learners in their mixed ability groups, solve a problem by constructing sentences with the phrase types.

· Sentence/Word cards · Videos with dialogues · Role-play

· Audio · TV · Films and narratives

· Varieties of narrative texts and Passages
· Old News papers

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 61

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
3. GRAMMAR
2. VOCABULARY

Learning Outcomes
1.3.2.LO.1 Employ the appropriate use of vocabulary in contexts.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners are able to communicate effectively with appropriate
vocabulary. · Learners participate in group discussions and express opinions
explicitly. · Learners participate meaningfully in various interactive
situations. · Learners tolerate the views of others and find appropriate
language to suggest corrections.
Cultural Identity: · Learners use vocabulary appropriately to depict desired cultural
values such as respect for the elderly, fair play, humility, hard work and truthfulness. · Learners employ desired vocabulary to admonish one another to ensure compliance with acceptable societal norms.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings

62 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions. National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 63

Content Standards
1.3.2.CS.1 Demonstrate and apply the appropriate use of vocabulary in general communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 1.3.2.LI.1 Use appropriate vocabulary in specific contexts. E.g., Formal and informal situations
Experiential Learning: Using role-play/dramatisation and conversational drills, learners in mixed ability groups, use appropriate vocabulary in specific contexts while tolerating and accepting divergent views.

Example: Greetings at different occasions i. At the hospital ii. At the shopping mall
iii. On the bus with parents etc.

Assessment
1.3.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Pictures for description and prediction · Brainstorming · Role-play · Games on vocabulary building and use (Mother-and-children, Semantic map, Word - of - the - day, Charades, Hangman etc. · Check online...teambuilding.com

64 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
3. GRAMMAR
3. PUNCTUATION AND CAPITALIZATION

Learning Outcomes
1.3.3.LO.1 Employ the accurate use of vocabulary and spelling conventions in varied contexts.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: Learners facilitate collaboration by communicating desirably and employing appropriate vocabulary, and spelling conventions.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners' listening skills are enhanced which enables them to
adapt to any environment. · Learners are able to apply their critical thinking skills to improve
upon their work environment.
Digital Literacy: · Learners develop skills in information management while using
appropriate ICT tools to master the use of accurate vocabulary and spelling conventions. · Learners gain mastery of ICT applications and are able to solve problems in various contexts.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 65

66 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

Content Standards
1.3.3.CS.1 Demonstrate appropriate use of vocabulary and spelling conventions in communication.
Teaching and Learning Resources

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI

Assessment

1.3.3.LI.1 Identify and use Punctuation Marks appropriately.
Experiential Learning: · Using conversational drills and intonation strategies, learners in mixed ability groups, use
punctuation marks (comma, period, question, exclamation) appropriately in speech and writing while tolerating and accepting divergent views. · Learners correct punctuation errors in selected paragraphs.

1.3.3.AS.1
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

· Selected texts · Old newspapers

· Video games on intonation strategies

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 67

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
1. PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF TEXT

Learning Outcomes
1.4.1.LO.1 Write clearly, arrange and present ideas in a logical and unified manner through written communication.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words is enhanced.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners convince others to accept their points of view by using appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners categorise ideas for easy consumption for an audience.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating appropriately to their audience.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings

68 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

1.4.1.LO.2 Generate distinct paragraphs within a composition centered on a specific subject.

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words
is enhanced.

Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners convince others to accept their points of views by
using appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners categorise ideas for easy consumption for an audience.

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to
communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating
appropriately to their audience.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 69

70 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways · developing habits of turn-taking in
diverse communicative settings · negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

Content Standards
1.4.1.CS.1 Develop, organise and express ideas coherently and cohesively in writing.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.4.1.LI.1 Use an extended range of cohesive devices (e.g., connectors to show addition) to improve paragraph coherence.
Talk for learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials (sample
essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure of a linear narrative essay; i. Introductory paragraph containing · Central Idea (for the whole essay) · Supporting sentences (to serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs) ii. Body paragraphs (containing main ideas--topic sentences) iii. Concluding paragraph · Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs

Assessment
1.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem -solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story: The beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay)

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 71

ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as, until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion
· Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding paragraphs.
· Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
1.4.1.LI.2 Develop a paragraph, focusing on the elements of unity.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials (sample
essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure of a linear narrative essay; i. Introductory paragraph containing: · Central Idea (for the essay) · Supporting sentences (to serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs) ii. Body paragraphs (containing main ideas--topic sentences), iii. Concluding paragraph

Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended
critical thinking and reasoning

· Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs.

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills.

72 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion. · Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding
paragraphs. · Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
· Sample essay, · Passages from books, · Journals, · Sample texts from social media, · Story map etc.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 73

Content Standards 1.4.1.CS.2 Create different paragraphs within a composition on a given topic.
Teaching and Learning Resources

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.4.1.LI.1 Compose introductory and body paragraphs on a given topic.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · In mixed ability groups, learners examine sample essays (sample essays and passages from books,
journals and the Internet) to identify their features. · Learners, in their groups, plan and develop non-linear narrative essays focusing on the elements of
unity, coherence and paragraph completeness with appropriate transitional expressions. · In the same or different mixed ability groups, learners compose essays in which events are not
presented sequentially but rather mixed so that events are linked through flashbacks and other literary techniques such as suspense and foreshadowing to develop the plot of the narrative. · In writing the story learners may use first person, second person, third person (third-person omniscient or limited perspective), to represent the voice of the person telling the story (narrator). Revise and edit the writing for sense or meaning, and effect (emotional reaction). Proofread to selfcorrect or peer-edit. Publish or present in various media including ICT and on the various notice boards on the school's premises. Learners refer to books and the Internet for examples of cohesive devices such as Time clauses, Conditional clauses, Purpose clauses, Reason clauses, Result clauses, Clauses of Concessive, etc. This search on the Internet will enhance their technological skills. · Learners work collaboratively and employ appealing strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs. E.g. restating, by paraphrasing, the central idea of the entire essay and supporting ideas. · Learners peer evaluate what they have written. · Working in groups, learners acquire the value of contributing to a common goal. · The following skills are also acquired: communication and collaboration, critical thinking and problem solving, innovation and creativity and Leadership and collaboration.
· Sample essays and passages from books · Journals and the Internet.

Assessment
1.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

74 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
2. TEXT TYPES AND PURPOSES

Learning Outcomes 1.4.2.LO.1 Utilize a process-oriented approach to craft descriptive, creative, informative and persuasive written compositions.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words is
enhanced.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners are able to convince others to accept their points of
views by using appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners are able to categorise ideas for easy consumption of an
audience.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating
appropriately to their audience.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.
· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.
· identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings
· negotiating conflicts constructively

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 75

· sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others.
· learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
· tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn.
· accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

1.4.2.LO.2
Create email, memorandum, program agenda, application (job, services, etc.) acceptance letter and articles based on provided subjects using suitable formatting.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners appreciate views from diverse perspectives and can apply
those viewpoints meaningfully. · Learners interact dynamically in various situations. · Learners tolerate the views of others and find appropriate
language to talk to one another.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners are able to put non-sequential ideas together in a logical
manner. · Learners are able to find solutions when faced with difficult
situations.
Innovation and Creativity: · Learners are empowered to perceive ideas from different angles. · Learners are able to put ideas together in order to develop
innovative concepts.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Working in collaborative ways in an environment that promotes gender equality and social inclusion will ensure: · respect for other individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embracing diversity and practice
inclusion. · the examination and dispel of
misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogation of stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through;

76 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners develop initiatives in solving societal problems. · Learners are able to motivate one another in solving problems. · Learners gain expertise to lay foundations for professional
development.
Critical Thinking and Problem-solving Skills: · Learners develop flexibility as they arrange ideas, which are not in
normal sequence. · Learners' reasoning skills are enhanced and they are able to adapt
to varied situations.
Digital Literacy: · Learners gain competence in ICT to support their own learning as well as encourage others. · Learners are able to manage ideas using ICT.

· working in collaborative ways · developing habits of turn-taking in
diverse communicative settings · negotiating conflicts constructively · Sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 77

Content Standards
1.4.2.CS.1 Use a process approach to compose descriptive, narrative/imaginative, informational, persuasive and argumentative texts.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.4.2.LI.1 Write short stories, using precise words and phrases to convey a vivid picture of experiences.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials (sample
essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure of a linear narrative essay; i. Introductory paragraph containing: · Central Idea (for the essay) · Supporting sentences (to serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs) ii. Body paragraphs (containing main ideas--topic sentences), iii. Concluding paragraph · Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs.

Assessment
1.4.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills.

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay)

78 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as, until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion.
· Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding paragraphs.
· Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
1.4.2.LI.2
Write a persuasive piece that states and defends a position. Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials (sample
essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media).
Critical Thinking Skills · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills

1.4.2.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion. · Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding
paragraphs. · Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 79

1.4.2.LI.3
Compose text to compare given issues or situations.
Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion.
o Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece.
· Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc.
· Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills.

1.4.2.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion. · Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding
paragraphs. · Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
· Sample essay, · Passages from books · Journals · Sample texts from social media, · Story map etc.

80 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
1.4.2.CS.2 Apply writing skills to specific life situations.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 1.4.2.LI.1 Compose an informal letter to a friend.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · In mixed ability groups, learners examine sample essays (sample essays and passages from books,
journals and the internet) to identify their features. · Learners, in their groups, plan and develop non-linear narrative essays focusing on the elements
of unity, coherence and paragraph completeness with appropriate transitional expressions. · In the same or different mixed ability groups, learners compose essays in which events are not
presented sequentially but rather mixed so that events are linked through flashbacks and other literary techniques such as suspense and foreshadowing to develop the plot of the narrative. · In writing the story, learners may use first person, second person and third person (third-person omniscient or limited perspective) to represent the voice of the person telling the story (narrator). Revise and edit the writing for sense or meaning, and effect (emotional reaction). Proofread to self-correct or peer-edit. Publish or present in various media including ICT and on the various notice boards on the school's premises. Learners refer to books and the internet for examples of cohesive devices such as Time clauses, Conditional clauses, Purpose clauses, Reason clauses, Result clauses, Clauses of Concessive, etc. This search on the Internet will enhance their technology skills. · Learners work collaboratively and employ appealing strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs. e.g. restating, by paraphrasing, the central idea of the entire essay and supporting ideas. · Learners peer evaluate what they have written. · Working in groups, learners acquire the value of contributing to a common goal. · The following skills are also acquired: communication and collaboration, critical thinking and problem solving, innovation and creativity and Leadership and collaboration.
1.4.2.LI.2 Compose email, memo, programme agenda, application (job, services etc.) and acceptance letter on given topics using appropriate format.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials.

Assessment 1.4.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning
1.4.2.AS.2 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 81

82 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Critical Thinking Skills: · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence.
E.g. Besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication Skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept
constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills

Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc.) , suitable background information and a conclusion. · Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding
paragraphs. · Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.

1.4.2.LI.3 Write articles on given issues for publication in national newspapers and magazines.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials.
Critical Thinking Skills: · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence.
E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept
constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills.

1.4.2.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion.

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding paragraphs.
· Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
· Sample essays and passages from books · Journals and the Internet.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 83

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
3. BUILDING AND PRESENTING KNOWLEDGE

Learning Outcomes
1.4.3.LO.1 Engage in the process of conducting research in order to construct and effectively present knowledge.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words is
enhanced.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners convince others to accept their points of views by using
appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners categorise ideas for easy consumption of an audience.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating
appropriately to their audience.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.
· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.
· identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings
· negotiating conflicts constructively

84 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others.
· learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
· tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn.
· accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 85

Content Standards 1.4.3.CS.3 Research to build and present knowledge.
Teaching and Learning Resources

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 1.4.3.LI.1 Retrieve information from multiple print sources, organise and present it in writing.
Talk for Learning: · Learners, in mixed ability groups, brainstorm and collaborate in developing ideas on a given topic for an essay. · Learners refer to books and the Internet for various punctuation marks and how to use them.
Note: Stories without punctuations are provided for individuals and the mixed ability groups to punctuate. In their groups, learners acquire the following skills:
1. Communication and collaboration; critical thinking and problem solving, innovation and creativity and, leadership.
2. Computer skills; they learn to respect individuals and their views and embrace diversity and practise inclusion.
· Stories without punctuations to be provided for individuals and groups to punctuate · Story map · Conventional signs

Assessment
1.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

86 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
5. LITERATURE
1. NARRATIVE, DRAMA, POETRY

Learning Outcomes 1.5.1.LO.1 Explore the meaning of literature

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners work collaboratively to define and understand literature
in given situations. · Learners appreciate the views of others as they generate meaning
from given texts.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners evaluate situations to find appropriate answers to
societal issues. · Learners examine any text they encounter to derive appropriate
meaning. · Learners draw inferences from texts to derive appropriate
meaning.

GESI: Collaboratively, learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.
· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.
· identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· be sensitive to the interrelatedness of various aspects of life as they work together.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, the social and emotional development of the learner must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through the application of learning strategies to ensure learners:
· share their opinions to grow awareness of their own emotional reaction to help in communication.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 87

· ask questions on the actions of characters in texts and stories.
· learn to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
· accept the views of others as they use their background to define Literature through their experience.

1.5.1.LO.2 Employ language to analyse a text for its meaning.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners collaborate with peers to derive meaning from texts. · Learners accommodate others' views when brainstorming to
understand the thematic issues in texts.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners identify with characters in texts and emulate their
positive traits to enhance their personal development. · Learners acquire leadership qualities from the protagonists in the
literature texts.
Digital Literacy: Learners enhance their digital literacy skills by browsing the internet to watch characters in movies.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving Skills: · Through analysis, inferences learners derive deeper meaning from
given texts. · Through deductions, learners will develop their creative thinking
and problem-solving skills.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination, friendliness, openmindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths
about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life in texts.

88 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Personal Development and Leadership: · Learners go through the literary activities individually to enhance
their personal development. · Learners analyse any text for desired meaning.

SEL: Consciously develop the learning strategies that ensure that learners: · share their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reactions to situations. · take turns and share ideas. · ask questions on the actions of characters in
texts and stories. · learn to interact with others in meaningful and
positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · relate characters' behaviour to personal experience to make them feel good about themselves. · relate personal goals and mindset to real classroom goals to make them functional.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination, friendliness, openmindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
Cross-Cutting Issues: · This indicator relates to reading, writing and
creative art lessons that allow learners to work collaboratively to bring out their creative abilities. Texts should convey characters that are balanced; setting that is not only rural or urban. · Characters should be chosen to cover both masculine and feminine gender. · Text should consider issues that would not bring cultural shocks.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 89

1.5.1.LO.3
Employ monologues and dialogues in texts.

Communication and Collaboration: · As learners work as a class, in pairs, or in groups they learn to
accept constructive feedback. · Learners are able to tolerate the views of one another.
Personal Development and Leadership: Learners apply the use of monologues and dialogues to enhance their personal communication.

GESI: Collaborating as a team in an inclusive way, cross-sharing knowledge to promote understanding among groups and individuals leads to: · respect for individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embracing diversity and practice inclusion. · examining and dispelling misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogating stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identifying injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · being sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.
SEL: Consciously develop the learning strategies that ensure that learners: · share their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reactions. · notice the facial expressions and posture of
others as they share their experiences. · ask questions about the actions of people in
texts and stories. · learn to interact with others in meaningful and
positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerate the views of others.

90 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

1.5.1.LO.4
Traces the sequence of events in texts.

Communication and Collaboration: Learners communicate competently as they share ideas and accept constructive feedback from their peers.
Personal Development and Leadership: · Learners examine literary texts and enhance their personal
development. · Learners are able to analyse any text for desired meaning.
Digital Literacy: Learners enhance their digital literacy skills by browsing the internet to watch characters in movies.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination, friendliness, openmindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork.
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths
about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.
SEL: Consciously develop the learning strategies that ensure that learners: · share their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reactions. · notice the facial expressions and posture of
others as they share their experiences. · ask questions that relate to the actions of
people in texts and stories.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 91

1.5.1.LO.5 Explore different themes in African poems.

Cultural identity: · Learners explore their cultural identity. · Learners appreciate the values of diverse African cultures.

Personal Development and Leadership: · Learners examine literary texts and enhance their personal
development. · Learners are able to analyse any text for desired meaning.

92 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· learn to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
· tolerate the views of others.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination, friendliness, openmindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths
about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life. · Identify appropriate diction, intonation and stress in reciting the poem.
SEL: Consciously develop the learning strategies that ensure that learners:

· share their opinions to grow in awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others.
· ask questions that focus on the actions of people in texts and stories.
· learn to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways to reduce in selfish behaviours.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination, friendliness, openmindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 93

Content Standards
1.5.1.CS.1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of how language of literary genres facilitates understanding of a text.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century and GESI 1.5.1.LI.1 Use the definition of literature to identify its genres.
Experiential Learning: In mixed ability groupings, learners use concepts map to define literature in simple terms using different sources including the Internet/watch a movie.
Task-Based Learning: · Learners outline the importance of literature in everyday life activities. · Learners identify the genres that make up literature (Narrative, Drama, Poetry) and identify the
individual characteristics. 1.5.1.LI.2 Use language to describe characters in movies, narratives and play scripts to make meaning.
Experiential Learning: In mixed ability groupings, learners brainstorm general knowledge in Literature. Learners go through interactive activities (e.g., watching a movie, learners' own stories, role-play, dramatisation etc.) ensuring collaboration to discuss how the roles of characters help to make meaning.
Task-Based Learning: · Using an extract from a text, learners in mixed groups identify how the writer uses language to
portray characters in a narrative. · In groups, learners compose short stories using appropriate language devoid of sexiest terms to
describe characters in a narrative. · Learners in their convenient groups, use extract from a text to analyse how a writer uses
language to portray characters in a play. · In a convenient group, learners collaboratively create varied sentence forms or styles to describe
or convey characters in a play. 1.5.1.LI.3 Create monologues and dialogues in narratives and plays to make meaning.
Group Work/Collaboration: Learners collaboratively identify monologues and dialogues in narratives and plays and discuss how they help to convey meaning.

Assessment 1.5.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning 1.5.1.AS.2 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning
1.5.1.AS.3 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding

94 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Task-Based Learning: · In mixed ability groups, learners collaboratively create monologues in narratives. · In groups, learners collaboratively create dialogues in plays.

Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

1.5.1.LI.4 Develop the sequence of events across texts and how it contributes to meaning.
Experiential Learning: · As a class, learners watch a movie or read a text and trace the sequence of events. · In mixed ability groups, learners identify the plot in the movie/text through the herringbone or
story map (i.e. the use of: who, what, where, when, how, why) strategy. In mixed ability groupings, learners collaboratively trace the plot from the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and resolution.
Task-Based learning: In groups, learners identify the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and resolution of a text/play script and make simple notes on them. Learners present their findings orally.

1.5.1.AS.4 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Collaborative Learning: With the experience in tracing the plot, learners collaboratively create their own story lines following a sequence.

1.5.1.LI.5 Identify and discuss the dominant themes in two African poems and how themes contribute to meaning.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: In groups, learners identify the dominant themes in two African poems.

1.5.1.AS.5
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Concept Reinforcing Level 3 Strategic Thinking Level 4 Extended Reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 95

1.5.1.LI.6
Discuss the relationship among the plot, themes and literary devices in two African poems and how they contribute to meaning · Collaboratively, learners compare the dominant themes in the two African poems. · In gender mixed groupings, learners identify the literary devices used in the poems. · Through collaborative discussions, learners identify the relationship among plots, themes and the
literary devices identified in the two African poems.

1.5.1.AS.6
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and

· Internet

Learning Resources · Dictionaries

· Texts

· Motifs (designs or images that have

symbolic meaning used for effect.

E.g., broom, mirror, chair) Books,

Television, laptops, etc.

· Level appropriate texts

· Sentence cards

· Play scripts by learners

· Movies

· Props (objects used on stage or

· Level appropriate literary text

screen by actors during a

· Student-made stories

performance. It also refers to anything movable or portable on a stage or a set) distinct from the

· Different selected African poems · Students-made poems

actors, scenery, electrical equipment

and costume.

· Level appropriate texts

· Student made scripts

· Play scripts

96 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

YEAR TWO
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 97

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
1. ENGLISH SPEECH SOUNDS

Learning Outcomes

21st Century Skills and Competencies

2.1.1.LO.1 Articulate English vowels (diphthongs and triphthongs) and consonant sounds effectively in oral communication.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners communicate with clarity and confidence. · Through pair/group activities, learners cultivate team spirit and work
collaboratively. · Learners creatively blend different speech sounds to form meaningful
words.

Creativity and Innovation: Learners creatively blend different speech sounds to form meaningful words.

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: Learners exhibit criticalthinking skills by combining sounds, which result in meaningful interactions.

GESI3, SEL4 and Shared National Values
GESI: Collaborating and communicating well in a team in an inclusive way, leads to: · peaceful coexistence among different
religions, cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · building and maintaining healthy social relationships. · good team spirit and unity among learners in diverse communication settings.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways · developing habits of turn-taking in
diverse communicative settings · negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional

3 Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 4 Socio-Emotional Learning
98 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

2.1.1.LO.2 Articulate consonants and consonant clusters effectively in oral communication.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners communicate with clarity and confidence. · Through pair/group activities, learners cultivate team spirit and work
collaboratively. · Learners creatively blend different speech sounds to form meaningful
words.

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners become critical about sound combinations that result in meaningful and wrong words and articulate words appropriately in connected speech.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Collaborating and communicating well in a team in an inclusive way, leads to: · peaceful coexistence among different
religions, cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · build and maintain healthy social relationships. · good team spirit and unity among learners in diverse communication settings.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways · developing habits of turn-taking in
diverse communicative settings

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 99

100 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

Content Standards
2.1.1.CS1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of speech sounds in oral communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century and GESI
2.1.1.LI.1 Use diphthongs (closing and centring) in connected speech.
Collaborative Learning: Learners in attainment groups, work collaboratively to identify the features of diphthongs and use them effectively in words and in connected speech. Learners critically assess the sound combination of diphthongs in English and creatively blend them into meaningful words. Learners then communicate with clarity and confidence, being mindful of the unique qualities of each sound while tolerating their peers' individual differences in the articulation of the sounds. Examples:
i. In groups, learners brainstorm on words that contain closing diphthongs (/a/, /a/ /e/, //, //) and centring diphthongs (/e/, //, /u/) E.g., /e/ - bake, say, sail, pain, etc. // - boy, foil, poise, etc. /e/ - air, tear, bear, etc.
ii. In pairs, learners then use words containing the diphthongs above to form sentences. Eg:1 I may break the cage. Eg:2 Both girls and boys play with toys.
iii. Using a jigsaw game, learners in their groups find appropriate sounds to complete words: Eg: h/oi/st ; b/ow; j/ew/el; gr/ow/l; b/oy; l/aw/n; a/ud/io.
iv. Learners have the opportunity to communicate freely among themselves in the groups as they share opinions.
2.1.1.LI.2
Use triphthongs in connected speech.
Collaborative Learning: · Learners work in mixed-ability groups to critically assess the sound combination of triphthongs in
English and creatively blend them into meaningful words. Eg: In groups, learners brainstorm on words that contain triphthongs (e.g., /e/, /a/, //, //, /a/). e.g. /e/- layer, /a/- liar, fire, //-loyal, royal, //- lower, mower /a/ - power, hour
· Learners then in pairs, use the words to form sentences. e.g: Loyalty is a virtue., It is bad to be a liar.

Assessment 2.1.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning
2.1.1.AS.2 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 101

102 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

2.1.1.LI.3 Use consonant sounds (affricates and approximants) in connected speech.
Independent Learning: · Individually, learners listen to a group of words or a short passage from an audio recording or a
video (e.g. YouTube, movienglish.net), containing the consonant sounds affricates (//, //) and approximants (w, j, l, r). · Learners then, in their convenient groups, work collaboratively, using the sounds and paying attention to their peers' unique individual differences in articulating the sounds in connected speech.
Think-Pair-Share: · Alternatively, in their attainment groups, learners may use think-pair-share to practise the
pronunciation of the consonant sounds in the words in a given passage. · Learners then in pairs, form sentences with words containing the consonant sounds (e.g. church,
judge, water, red, yes, etc.) E.g. The cheerleader read the well-written letter yesterday.

2.1.1.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Learners finally create dialogues with words containing the consonant sounds to consolidate their new knowledge and improve upon their communication skills, communicating with clarity and confidence.

2.1.1.LI.4 Identify patterns of consonant clusters occurring at syllable initial and final positions in connected speech.
Collaborative Learning: In mixed-ability groups, learners brainstorm on common consonant clusters occurring at syllable initial and final positions. Learners pay attention to patterns of the consonant cluster formation in the English Language and use that in their everyday interaction, with clarity and confidence. E.ample: i. Two consonant clusters:
a) Initial Position /br/ - brain, bridge, bread, bright, etc. /fr/ - free, phreak, phrase, fruit, etc. /gr/ - green, gray, grin, great, etc. /kl/(cl) -clean, clay, clap, cloud, etc. /kr/(cr) ­ cream, crate, crane, crew, etc.

2.1.1.AS.4
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

/sk/(sc) - skit, score, scold, school, etc. /sl/ - slit, slate, slot, slum, etc. /tr/ - treat, tray, trim, trait, etc. b) Final position /sk/(sc) ­ desk, mask, disk, task, etc. /ks/(x) ­ axe, six, apex, annexe /st/ - best, cast, cyst, gist, etc. /k/(nk) ­ blink, blank, crank, plank, etc. ii. Three consonant clusters a) Initial position /skr/(scr) ­ screen, scream, scrape, scroll, etc. /spr/ - spring, spray, sprout, spree, etc. /str/ - stray, straight, stream /spl/ - split, splendour, splice, splash, etc.

· In convenient mixed ability groups, learners identify and/or generate words containing the consonant clusters.
· In group class presentations, learners articulate consonants and consonant clusters appropriately through language games: E.g. Tongue Twisters: She sells seashore shells at the seashore. The shells she sells at the seashore are seashore shells. Through three cheese trees three free fleas flew. While these fleas flew, frenzy breeze blew . . .
· Word Search: make/write consonant cluster sounds and let learners in their groups search for as many words that match the sounds within a given number of minutes.
· Through pair/group activities, learners will cultivate team spirit, tolerance, apply critical thinking and be able to work collaboratively.

2.1.1.LI.5 Pronounce words containing consonant clusters accurately in connected speech, including consonant clusters with silent sounds (e.g.: subtle, listen, comb, etc.).
Independent Learning: Individually, learners use the identified words containing consonant clusters in speech, paying particular attention to common mispronunciation problems involving consonant clusters. Learners are critical in identifying appropriate words.

2.1.1.AS.5 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 103

Think-Pair-Share: · Examples: Changing the order of the consonant sounds: e.g. Saying /ssk/ for /sks/= six; and saying
/ćsk/ for /ćks/ = axe · Leaving out a sound in the cluster, e.g. /ć.ses/ for /ćk.ses/= access; /sses/ for /skses/ = success. · Adding an extra sound to the cluster or inserting a vowel in between the cluster. E.g. /slk / for /
slk / = silk; /sukwe/ for /skwe/ = square
· In pairs, learners take turns to articulate the sounds accurately and to avoid the commonly misappropriated consonant clusters.

Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Collaborative Learning: · In mixed ability groups, learners work collaboratively to identify words containing consonant clusters
having one of the consonant sounds silent. Eg. Subtle, listen, comb, etc. · Learners, in groups, take turns to pronounce the words with silent consonants appropriately in
speech.

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Audio recordings · Visual aids such as sound charts (i.e., sounds in different
colour backgrounds), pictures, props, regalia, etc. · Minimal pair aids · Materials such as pictures or books with speech sounds,
dictionaries (print/audio)

· Audio-visual aids e.g., YouTube videos, television, etc. · https://www.speechactive.com/english-vowel-ipa-
international-phonetic-alphabet · Visual aids such as sound charts (sounds in different
colour background), pictures, props, regalia, etc. · Tongue twister cards.

104 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
2. LISTENING COMPREHENSION

Learning Outcomes
2.1.2.LO.1 Interpret the contextual meaning of level appropriate oral texts.

21st Century Skills and Competencies
Communication and Collaboration: · Learners develop collaborative skills while interacting with their
peers. · Listening also results in friendship, teamwork and support,
which eventually culminate in good communication skills.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners take informed decisions based on information
received. · Learners process information and act upon it to solve societal
problems.

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values
GESI: Collaborating and communicating well in a team in an inclusive way, as well as giving listening ears to each other leads to: · peaceful coexistence among different
religions, cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · building and maintaining healthy social relationships. · good team spirit and unity among learners in diverse communication settings.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · tolerating one another in a group as
they communicate, listen to and collaborate with one another. · learning from others and respect each other's views and opinions in diverse speech context. · understanding, relating to and being sensitive to others' choice of words in both academic and social discourses.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 105

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
106 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
2.1.2.CS.1 Demonstrate the ability to listen critically, extract and construct varied levels of meaning from any oral communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century and GESI 2.1.2.LI.1 Recognise the purpose of varied oral communication.
Collaborative Learning: · In their mixed ability groups, learners work collaboratively to recognise the purpose of varied oral
communication. Through this, learners appreciate their individual capabilities, and develop tolerance for others' points of view. E.g., Learners individually listen to a level appropriate text and identify the purpose of the communication such as to inform, to express one's feelings, to persuade, etc.
· Learners in groups, discuss the purpose of the text. · Using a Round-robin technique, learners ensure that each member of the group takes turns to
express their ideas on the purpose of the communication so that no particular learner monopolises the discussion. · Learners take turns to share ideas agreed on in the group with members of other groups or the whole class.
2.1.2.LI.2 Listen to and identify speaker intended meaning in level appropriate oral texts.
Initiating Talk for Learning: · Learners in their mixed ability groups extract relevant information from texts by identifying a
speaker's intended meaning from a sample oral text. Through this, learners communicate effectively with others, both male and female, value others' perspectives in interaction and in adult life. E.g., Think-pair-share activity
· Learners in pairs, brainstorm a speaker's intended meaning (e.g. to request, command, declare, offer, promise, warn/caution, etc.) of a particular message in conversation.
· Learners then interpret the purpose of the intended meaning of the speaker in relation to the context of speaking.
· Learners, finally share ideas with the larger group to reach a consensus.

Assessment 2.1.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning
2.1.2.AS.2 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 107

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners develop collaborative skills by participating with their peers when engaged in
communication. · Listening also results in friendship, teamwork and support eventually culminating into good
communication skills.

Teaching and Learning Resources

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners' ability to take informed decisions on the information being received, process and act
upon it requires critical thinking and problem-solving skills. · Learners become conscious of personal biases and stereotypes; sensitive to the inter-relatedness of
the various spheres of life, groups and individuals. · Learners also develop the values of tolerance, respect for others' views and diversity.

· Audio recordings (e.g. online stories, teacher recorded texts, etc.)
· Book extracts or reading passages for read aloud activities.

· Short stories · Podcasts (e.g. Lyrics Training, Listening Notes, Accent
Rosie, TeachVid, Read Aloud, etc.)

108 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
3. CONVERSATION/COMMUNICATION

Learning Outcomes 2.1.3.LO.1 Use social cohesion strategies in all speech situations.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners communicate in diverse situations using registers
acquired in conversation lessons. · Through appropriate use of language, learners forestall
interpersonal conflicts arising from misinterpretation of language.
Digital Literacy: By way of language games, learners acquire digital literacy skills.

GESI: Collaborating and communicating well in a team in an inclusive way leads to: · peaceful coexistence among different
religions, cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · building and maintaining healthy social relationships. · Good team spirit and unity among learners in diverse communication settings.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · tolerating one another in a group as they
communicate and collaborate with one another. · Learn from others and respect each other's views and opinions in diverse speech context. · understanding, relating to and being sensitive to others' choice of words in both academic and social discourses.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 109

Content Standards
2.1.3.CS.1 Demonstrate effective use of communicative strategies in a variety of speech situations.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
2.1.3.LI.1 Use varied communicative strategies in all speech situations.
Class Activity: · Learners listen to and discuss story/conversation/scenario that depict varied communicative
strategies in connected speech. e.g.: respect, honesty, hard work, etc. · Learners then share ideas on the different ways of communicating ideas on specific topics in their
culture. Eg., The use of euphemistic expressions, proverbs, figurative and idiomatic expressions, etc.
Talk for Learning (TFL): · Learners in their mixed-ability groups interact with their peers on a given topic as they identify and
effectively use varied communicative strategies in diverse communication settings. · Develop appreciation of different cultural perspectives, embrace diversity and practice inclusion in
varied speech contexts.

Assessment
2.1.3.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners communicate in diverse situations using the registers acquired in conversation lessons. · Through appropriate use of language, learners forestall interpersonal conflicts arising from
interpreted language.

Digital Literacy: · By way of language games, learners acquire digital literacy. · Learners appreciate their individual differences, embrace inclusion and interrogate social injustice. · Learners also cultivate the values of tolerance, teamwork, and respect for one another's points of
view.
2.1.3.LI.2 Appreciate diverse communicative perspectives in communication.
Experiential Learning: Learners bring on board experiences from their different cultural groups and reflect on their individual and cultural differences in communication in specific contexts (e.g. wedding/marriage, arbitration).

2.1.3.AS.2 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding

110 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Examples: i. In groups, learners collaborate to develop a short drama of selected communicative contexts, using
effective intercultural communication skills to communicate sensitively, taking into consideration listeners' gender, religion, and beliefs. ii. In mixed ability groups, learners use a variety of polite strategies in communication, create and sustain meaningful conversation, willing to cooperate and speak in socially approved ways (e.g. turntaking, opening and closing, keeping to the topic of conversation), and use appropriate expressions/strategies (e.g. repair, topic control and topic shift strategies, termination cues, etc.) to avoid communication breakdown.

Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners communicate in diverse situations using the registers acquired in conversation lessons. · Through appropriate use of language, learners forestall interpersonal conflicts arising from
misinterpretation of language.

Digital Literacy: · By way of language games, learners acquire digital literacy. · Learners appreciate their individual differences, embrace inclusion and interrogate social injustice. · Learners also acquire the values of teamwork, cooperation, and tolerance for one another's ideas.

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Learner/Teacher generated topics or short scenarios · Short passages or stories (e.g. page turners) · Visuals, audio tapes, audio-visuals

· Conversation practice games · Wall pictures about different scenes, audio visuals about a
particular situation or profession, short drama or role play by two or more character

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 111

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
2. READING
1. READING COMPREHENSION

Learning Outcomes 2.2.1.LO.1 Employ knowledge of text comprehension strategies and levels of comprehension to analyse and interpret different kinds of texts.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Collaboration and Communication: · Learners develop the capability of reading to understand
and share complex ideas in communication. · Learners work together to create their own
comprehension questions. · Learners share stories from their personal reading with
group members.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners are challenged to analyse multiple texts, find
connections, and make meaning out of the texts. · Learners appropriately interpret information and find
solutions to societal issues. · Learners collaborate to critique one another's work to
improve it. · Learners critically analyse stories to select the best one for
award.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners develop passion for leadership and leadership
roles. · Learners become knowledgeable, confident and eloquent
public speakers.
Digital Literacy: Learners decipher authentic information in the digital space.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · learn to tolerate and respect the views of
every member of the group irrespective of their social status and religious beliefs. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life. · learn to tolerate and respect one another's views in the language classroom. · develop the ability to challenge traditional gender roles; both male and female members of the groups play leadership roles.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · developing relationships that make learners
sensitive to one another's feelings.

112 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· writing collaboratively. · interacting with others in meaningful ways. · accepting responsibility for their actions. · accepting roles and responsibilities that help
learners develop leadership skills. National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 113

Content Standards
2.2.1.CS.1 Demonstrate understanding of different types of reading and text comprehension strategies and use them to interpret a variety of level appropriate texts.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
2.2.1.LI.1 Explore advanced comprehension text strategies to enhance understanding of a variety of increasingly complex texts (fiction and non-fiction).
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Learners use several advanced text comprehension strategies to analyse and interpret a variety of level appropriate texts.
1. Story map · In mixed ability/mixed gender groups, learners work collaboratively to analyse and interpret given
texts using story maps. · Learners watch a video or a demonstration on how to use story maps to analyse texts. · Text must be gender responsive to enable learners interrogate their own stereotype about gender. · In small groups, learners use information from the brainstorming exercise to fill columns
appropriately on the story map sheets. · Groups transfer their findings on bigger sheets (e.g., flip chart sheets, old calendar backs, etc.) and
paste them on the classroom walls for a gallery walk. · Learners critique one another's work, giving constructive comments and taking feedback to help
them (learners) develop problem-solving competencies and to understand their capabilities in relation to others. · Encourage learners to work in groups to apply their knowledge of story mapping to analyse stories from a variety of texts including learners' Core Literature set books.

Assessment
2.2.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Talk for Learning (TFL): 2. Cooperative Learning with Jigsaw · In mixed ability/mixed gender groups of four or five members, learners learn to use the Cooperative
Learning with Jigsaw strategy to enhance their comprehension of text/passage (that can be divided into four or five parts). In their home groups (original groups learners belong to before they break into reading groups), each member is responsible for reading one of the text divisions. · Learners break into their Expert Groups (reading groups made up of only those who have been assigned, by their individual home groups, to read a particular portion of the given text). They read and critically discuss only their assigned portion. · Encourage learners to record their answers and use it to:

114 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

i. Complete graphic organizers ii. Summarize the text or iii. Answer text-based questions

· At the end of the reading session, each expert goes back to relay their analysis to their home group. · After all home group members have relayed their message, the group proves their understanding of
the text by answering high-level comprehension questions (inferential and evaluative questions). · Learners should be encouraged to learn to embrace gender equality and to address
injustice/inequalities through these group activities. · Give learners enough practice in these strategies to enhance their text comprehension.
2.2.1.LI.2 Use understanding of text at literal, inferential and critical levels to evaluate a variety of level-appropriate texts.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Learners classify a set of comprehension questions according to the level of understanding the questions are tested. · Learners listen to a variety of texts (fiction and informational) read aloud to them. · Learners work in mixed ability/mixed gender groups to sort the comprehension questions that
follow each text according to the level of understanding the questions are testing. Example: a question is testing literal understanding because its answer is stated right there in the text. · The difficulty level of text should be differentiated to enable struggling readers to participate in the exercise as well. · Groups share their work with the class giving reasons for the classification of the questions. · Group leadership roles should be assigned to both male and female members of the groups to enable learners challenge traditional gender roles as well as interrogate their own stereotype about gender.

2.2.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Gallery Walk: · Learners generate comprehension questions on a variety of level appropriate texts. · Working in mixed ability/mixed gender groups, learners read a given text and generate questions
that can test understanding of the text at literal, inferential and critical or evaluative levels. · Groups paste their questions on the classroom walls for a gallery walk activity and peer feedback.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 115

· Learners critique one another's work giving constructive feedback to help them appreciate the different competencies of individuals.

Talk for Learning (TFL): In pairs, learners search for information on easy and interesting ways to find information for answering literal, inferential (interpretive) and critical comprehension questions (e.g., answers to Literal questions are stated right in the text with almost all the words in question appearing in the answer. (i.e., Who invented the first bicycle? The first bicycle was invented by...)
2.2.1.LI.3 Explore the knowledge of grammatical structures of language and context clues to interpret complex structures in text.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · Learners identify the complex grammatical structures that pose difficulty in text interpretation. · Working in mixed ability groups, learners collaboratively read given texts and identify the complex
grammatical structures that pose problems to the interpretation of the text. · The text should be devoid of gender bias language to help learners embrace gender equality · Learners work in mixed ability/mixed gender groups to break the structures into simple sentences
for better interpretation of the text. · Lead learners to break a few complex structures into simple ones before they work in groups. · Text difficulty should be differentiated to enable struggling readers to participate effectively in the
activities.

2.2.1.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Talk for Learning (TFL): · Learners use context clues to interpret given words and phrases. · Learners work collaboratively in mixed ability/mixed gender groups to critically discuss the parts of
speech/function of certain words or phrases in the structure of given sentences e.g., The Ghanaian footballers are skilful. (`Ghanaian' here is modifying footballers so it is an adjective).

Initiating Talk for Learning: · Learners use context clues to interpret given words and phrases. · Learners work collaboratively in mixed ability/mixed gender groups to critically discuss the parts of
speech/function of certain words or phrases in the structure of given sentences e.g., The Ghanaian footballers are skilful. (`Ghanaian' here is modifying footballers so it is an adjective).

116 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Initiating Talk for Learning: · Learners do vocabulary consolidation activities to promote active engagement with vocabulary. · Learners work collaboratively in small mixed ability groups to practise using context clues, word
parts (e.g., prefixes) and reference aids (dictionary, glossary, thesauruses, etc.) to analyse texts and broaden their comprehension of vocabulary in a variety of texts. · Learners carry out a project to find other means of understanding vocabulary in context (e.g., restatement of the word in sentences that surround it, etc.).
2.2.1.LI.4 Read and analyse a variety of level-appropriate texts for enjoyment.
Individual Learning: · Learners select and read books individually for enjoyment. Encourage book choice to reflect
particular topics/issues. · Learners use the blurb of fiction texts as a guide for selecting books for individual reading.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · In mixed gender groups, learners read their texts silently and then share what they have read with
the group members. · The group, after listening to all its members, work collaboratively and critically to select the most
interesting story among the lot. · The group reads the text again and fills in a reporting worksheet on the book.
Gallery Walk: · Groups paste their reports on the classroom walls for a gallery walk to help learners embrace
diversity as well as understand their capabilities in relation to others. · Each group gives reasons for their choice of text. · Learners critique the stories after the gallery walk and come out with what they deem the overall
most interesting text and why. · Create the opportunity for groups to exchange books to enable learners to read extensively for
pleasure.

2.2.1.AS.4
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 117

2.2.1.LI.5 Read a variety of level-appropriate texts fluently.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning and Talk for Learning: · Learners brainstorm the importance of reading fluently. · In mixed ability/mixed gender groups, learners listen to the teacher read the same text (sentence or
paragraph) to them in two different ways (less-fluently and fluently). · Thinking critically, learners collaboratively discuss among them, which of the two readings is
understood better and why. · Learners listen to the teacher discuss how to read fluently (e.g., read words automatically, read in
meaningful chunks, pause appropriately, etc.). · Learners watch videos or demonstrations of some other learners engaging in reading fluently. · In small groups, learners discuss the video/demonstration and set targets for their individual reading. · Lead the class and model how to calculate a reader's fluency within a minute. (e.g. have a learner
time a reader for a minute whilst you and the rest of the class keep record of the number of words read and those read incorrectly). · In mixed ability/mixed gender groups, learners take turns to read for the group members to calculate their individual fluency rate.

2.2.1.AS.5
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Talk for Learning/Pair Work: · Learners engage in a variety of fluency activities, to make reading fun as well as improve upon their
fluency rate. · In pairs and groups, learners undertake the following fluency activities:

Choral Reading: Reading aloud simultaneously in a group.

Partner Reading: Reading aloud with a more fluent partner or with a partner of equal ability who provides a model of fluent reading helps with word recognition and provides feedback.

Tape-Assisted Reading: Reading aloud simultaneously or as an echo with an audio-tape model.

Readers' Theatre: Reading from scripts that have been derived from books that are rich in dialogue [e.g., the set books for Core Literature-in-English - Drama].

118 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Video on how to do story mapping · Blank Story map organizer templates · A variety of texts for story mapping · Books, including set books for Core Literature and other subjects areas · Large sheets - flip chart or old calendar backs and gallery walk activities · A variety of texts (fiction and non-fiction) for practising how to classify and answer the various types of comprehension
questions · A variety of passages for practising how to answer the lexical comprehension questions. · Word and sentence cards · Reading report charts. · A variety of storybooks · A collection of texts including Passages across curricular and from Core LiteratureinEnglish set books · Videos on reading fluency · Tape recordings on fluent reading.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 119

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
2. READING
2. SUMMARISING

Learning Outcomes 2.2.2.LO.1 Utilize knowledge and understanding of summary strategies to interpret texts.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Collaboration and Communication: Learners communicate effectively on any subject matter while collaborating with others.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners employ critical thinking in brainstorming activities
that result in good solutions to problems. · Learners critically critique one another's work to make it
better.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners identify key issues in any communicative situation
and summarise them appropriately. · Learners appreciate diversity, which may promote good
leadership.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.
· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.
· identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· avoid gender bias language to enable learners to embrace gender equality; texts must be gender and inclusion responsive.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · developing relationships that make learners
sensitive to one another's feelings. · writing collaboratively.

120 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· interacting with others in meaningful ways. · accepting responsibility for their actions. · accepting roles and responsibilities that help
learners develop leadership skills. National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 121

Content Standards
2.2.2.CS.1 Demonstrate an indepth understanding of texts of varied lengths and difficulty levels.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
2.2.2.LI.1 Apply a variety of strategies in summarising texts of varied lengths and difficulty levels.
Group Work/Collaboration and Pair Work: · Learners use a number of strategies to summarise given texts. · In mixed ability and mixed gender pairs, learners work collaboratively to use Paragraph Shrinking as
a strategy for summarising a text · Each learner takes turns to read, pause and summarise the main points of the paragraphs in the text. · Texts must be gender and inclusion responsive, avoiding gender bias language to enable learners
embrace gender equality. · Select easy to understand passages to start with. Create pairs within the classroom, bearing in mind
learners who require help on specific skills and who the most appropriate children are to help other children learn those skills.

Assessment
2.2.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Experiential Learning: · Learners listen and watch the teacher model the procedure for Paragraph Shrinking to understand
how to use the strategy. · In pairs, learners take turns playing "Coach" and "Player" in shrinking paragraphs into main points. · If a player ever gets it wrong, the "Coach" should ask the player to skim the paragraph again and
answer the question a second time.

Structuring Talk for Learning: · Pairs join another pair, to think critically of how to state the main ideas of a given paragraph in 10
words or less. · Group presenter roles should be assigned to both male and female members to enable learners
challenge traditional gender roles and stereotypes. · Groups share their work with the class for feedback as a way to monitor comprehension of texts.

Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · Learners use "Generating Interactions between Schemata and Text" (GIST) as a strategy to
summarise texts.

122 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· In mixed ability/mixed gender pairs, learners read short pieces of texts. They work collaboratively to answer who, what, when, where, why and how questions based on the text selection.
· Pairs join another pair to condense their answers into a one-sentence summary. · Groups share their one-sentence summaries with the class for peer feedback to help learners
develop skills for problem solving · Learners are tasked to search for other interactive ways of summarising texts.

Teaching and

· A variety of text with varying difficulty levels (from different sources including set books for Core Literature in English and

Learning Resources

other subjects) for practising summarising

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 123

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
3. GRAMMAR
1. GRAMMAR USAGE

Learning Outcomes 2.3.1.LO.1 Employ the knowledge of phrases and clauses and their functions in communication.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and collaboration: · Learners acquire effective and ethical communication, which
they can apply in different social contexts. · Learners learn from others and appreciate their needs. · Learners tolerate the views of others as they share ideas with
peers and accept constructive feedback.
Personal Development and Leadership: · Learners develop passion for leadership and leadership roles. · Learners become knowledgeable, confident and eloquent public
speakers.
Digital Literacy: Learners acquire digital literacy skills by playing language games using ICT tools.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.
· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.
· identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways.
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings.
· negotiating conflicts constructively.

124 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others.
· learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
· tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn.
· accepting responsibility for ones own actions and inactions.

2.3.1.LO.2
Use sample texts for identification and analysis of the types of subject-verb agreement in speech and in writing.

Global Citizenship: · Learners appreciate and respect the Ghanaian identity. · Learners are conscious of current global issues and relate well
with people from different language backgrounds.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners are challenged to analyse multiple texts, find
connections, and make meaning using appropriate concord. · Learners appropriately interpret information to enhance
harmony in interpersonal communication.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths
about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 125

2.3.1.LO.3 Use active/passive voice in presentations.
126 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Collaboration and Communication: Learners communicate effectively on any subject matter while collaborating with others.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: Learners employ critical thinking in brainstorming activities that result in good solutions to problems.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings. · negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness
of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths
about gender in relation to language and communication.

Leadership and Personal Development:

· interrogate stereotypes and biases about

· Learners identify key issues in any communicative situation and

gender and language use in their homes and

apply them appropriately for their personal development.

communities.

· Learners appreciate diversity, which may promote good

· identify injustice, especially in recognition of

leadership.

the contributions of different groups and

individuals.

· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of

various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways.
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings.
· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness
of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for ones own actions and inactions.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 127

Content Standards
2.3.1.CS.1 Demonstrate command of clauses in sentences for communicative purposes.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
2.3.1.LI.1 Identify and use the grammatical forms accurately in speech and writing.
Experiential Learning: In mixed ability groups, learners work collaboratively to identify phrases/clauses using literary texts, old newspapers and classify them accordingly, supporting one another and showing respect for one another's opinions.

Collaborative Learning: · Learners communicate and collaborate confidently with one another, critically assessing clauses to
write short paragraphs on selected themes and consolidating with activities to give learners more practice in clauses.

Assessment
2.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Example: Using the Jigsaw Puzzle, learners in their mixed gender groups play the clausal game on given themes - market scene, At the post office, At the bank etc.

· Learners can also play Anna Erskin's `fish game' or pretend to be DJs and play the clausal games. 2.3.1.LI.2 Apply the knowledge of noun clauses in sentences for communicative purposes.
Collaborative Learning: Learners work in pairs to identify noun clauses from given texts encouraging a full participation of all.
Task-Based Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups carefully use the identified noun clauses to provide meaningful information to writing or oral presentations.
Experiential Learning: Using recorded TV programmes, YouTube videos on noun clauses, learners in their mixed ability groups, work collaboratively, tolerating one another's views to consolidate their learning.

2.3.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

128 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

2.3.1.LI.3 Demonstrate command of Relative/Adjectival Clauses in sentences for communicative purposes.
Experiential Learning: In mixed ability groups, learners creatively use adjectival/relative clauses to convey meaning, encouraging and supporting their peers to analyse texts, adding variety, interest and richness to writing or oral presentations of information in varied contexts.

2.3.1.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

2.3.1.LI.4 Demonstrate command of Adverbial Clauses in sentences for communicative purposes.
Collaborative Learning: Learners in gender groups work collaboratively to identify types and functions of adverbial clauses in context.
Task-Based Learning: Ensuring tolerance for one another's views, learners work in mixed ability groups to identify the various subordinating conjunctions and the type of adverbial clauses they were introduced to.
Experiential Learning: · Learners watch YouTube videos on the form and use of adverbial clauses to express various ideas
(time, place, manner etc.) and apply them in their sentences. · Learners use adverbial clauses effectively in speech and writing.

2.3.1.AS.4
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

· Materials for playing Anna Erskin's `fish game' and jigsaw puzzle: rope, basin, cut - out fish
· Selected passages · Old news papers · The Radio Show (disc jockey)

· Sentence cards · Games · YouTube videos on grammatical
forms and functions of nouns · Adjectival games

· YouTube videos on grammatical forms and functions of adjectival/relative clauses
· Adverbial Games · YouTube videos on grammatical
forms and functions of adverbs

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 129

Content Standards
2.3.1.CS.2 Exhibit understanding and accurate use of subject-verb agreement in speech and writing.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 2.3.1.LI.1 Analyse the appropriate use of Subject and Verb in everyday communication.
Task-Based Learning: · Learners watch live/recorded TV programmes on good use of concord and other relating
topics/themes. · Individually, learners complete a substitution table with appropriate subject and verb.

Collaborative Learning: In mixed ability groups, learners collaboratively and critically analyse the agreement between subject and verb in given passages from old newspapers.

Assessment
2.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Build on What Others Say: In pairs and in tolerance, learners correct errors in subject-verb agreement in selected passages using the `build on what others say' strategy.

Role-Play: Alternatively, learners in mixed ability groups consolidate their learning by playing roles as TV presenters, Disc jockeys etc., applying the rules of concord.

NOTE: 1. Subject-verb agreement involves matching the appropriate verb form with its subject. 2. Subject and verb must agree in person and number. When the subject isplural, it must agree in number
with the verb.

Example: i. The girl has a new bag ii. Most students have received awards

a. Where the nouns used refer to the one and same person, the verb is singular. Example:His boss and friend works hard.

b. Singular subjects joined by or/nor take singular verbs. Example: Either my brother or my sister has arrived

130 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

c. When a singular subject and a plural subject are joined by or/nor, the verb agrees with the second subject that is nearer the `nor/or'. Example: Either the headmaster or the teachers are right.

d. A singular subject and a plural subject joined by with or no less than takes a singular verb. Example: The boy with his parents is attending a seminar on human relations.

e. A collective noun can take either the singular or plural verb. Example: The team is/are on the field.

Digital Literacy: Learners watch live/recorded TV programmes on misuse of concord and other relating topics/themes.

Global Citizenship: · Learners appreciate and respect the Ghanaian identity in appropriate use of language being
conscious of current global issues and relate well with people from different language backgrounds. · Encourage learners' involvement in the discussion and brainstorming sessions.

· Old newspapers · Sentence cards · YouTube videos

· Recorded TV sessions that depict wrong use of concord · The Radio Show recordings (Disc Jockey)

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 131

Content Standards
2.3.1.CS.3 Demonstrate mastery of use of active and passive voice in communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 2.3.1.LI.1 Distinguish between the forms of Active and Passive Voice.
Experiential Learning: Learners cooperatively, watch YouTube videos on varied use of active and passive voice structures to identify their corresponding actions (verb tense forms in use).

Structuring Talk for Learning: Learners use pair conversation drills to distinguish and practise the use of active/passive voice encouraging active participation and tolerance.

Collaborative Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups collaboratively identify active/passive voice sentence structures in given passages (using old newspapers).

Assessment
2.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Project-Based learning: Learners in their mixed ability groups carefully analyse samples of texts to identify differences in the use of passives in formal writing to practise their learning.

NOTE: Distinguish between active and passive voice: Active ­ S V O

Example: i. The girl swept the room.
Passive ­ Verb be + past participle of main verb E.g. The room was swept by the girl.

ii. The passive voice is used when the agent is not mentioned. E.g My book has been stolen-

iii. Some expressions are always in the passive. Example: I was born in 1960. Kwame Nkrumah was born at Nkroful.
iv. Conversion of active voice into passive voice: a) Active subject becomes passive agent. Example: Pearl sewed the dress. b) Active object becomes a passive subject.

132 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

Example: The dress was sewn by Pearl.
v. The preposition 'by' is introduced before the agent. Use of passive voice: for writing reports, minutes etc.
· Old newspapers · Sentence cards

· YouTube videos · Recorded TV sessions that depict use of coherent
sentence structures

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 133

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
3.GRAMMAR USAGE
2. VOCABULARY

Learning Outcomes 2.3.2.LO.1 Identify and use vocabulary appropriately and creatively in speech and writing.

21st Century Skills and Competencies
Collaboration and Communication: · Learners tolerate the views of their peers and
accept constructive feedback. · Learners use appropriate language in
communicating with their peers and others.
Creativity and Innovation: · Learners develop creativity and innovation in
communication. · Learners apply language creatively in various
contexts. · Learners creatively use ideas acquired in the
learning of grammar in effective interpersonal communication.

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and
language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the
contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various
aspects of life.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through: · working in collaborative ways · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings · negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of their
own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.

134 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn.
· accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 135

Content Standards
2.3.2.CS.1 Demonstrate the appropriate use of vocabulary.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 2.3.2.LI.1 Use appropriate vocabulary in speech and writing in specific contexts.
Games: · Using games such as Activity ball, Think-Pair-Share, Matching and Ordering of cards, Talking points
etc...... · Learners in mixed ability groups, create texts incorporating correct vocabulary and expressions to
form coherent structures in Proverbs, Idioms / Idiomatic expressions.
Collaborative Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups, collaboratively and carefully analyse the meaning and use of vocabulary from given passages using games. E.g., word relations such as Synonyms, Antonyms, Analogy in context.

Assessment
2.3.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

Communication Skills: Learners use appropriate vocabulary to communicate specific meaning with confidence by adding a variety of information to enrich their writing and speech. E.g: use connotations and associations of words with similar denotations (vocabulary in context).

· Word cards · Sentence cards · Warm-up games: E.g Sit in a circle and choose a word --
everyone must take turns coming up with a rhyme but if they repeat a word or take too long, the game is over.

· Mother and children game · Ann Erskine's fish game · Puzzles

136 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
1. PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF TEXT

Learning Outcomes
2.4.1.LO.1 Employ cohesive devices, including connectors that demonstrate contrasts, results and other relationships, with the purpose of enhancing the coherence between paragraphs.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words
is enhanced.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners convince others to accept their points of views by
using appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners categorise ideas for easy consumption of an audience.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to
communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating
appropriately to their audience.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: · To promote holistic learning, social
and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 137

2.4.1.LO.2 Engage in critical analysis and construct concluding paragraphs pertaining to a provided topic.
138 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings
· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners appreciate views from diverse perspectives and can
apply those viewpoints meaningfully. · Learners interact dynamically in various situations. · Learners tolerate the views of others and find appropriate
language to talk to one another.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners put non-sequential ideas together in a logical manner. · Learners find solutions when faced with difficult situations.
Innovation and Creativity: · Learners are empowered to perceive ideas from different angles.

GESI: Working in collaborative ways in an environment that promotes gender equality and social inclusion will ensure: · respect for other individuals of
different linguistic backgrounds. · embracing diversity and practice
inclusion. · the examination and dispel of
misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogation of stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities.

· Learners put ideas together in order to develop innovative concepts.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners develop initiatives in solving societal problems. · Learners are able to motivate one another in solving problems. · Learners gain expertise to lay foundations for professional
development.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving Skills: · Learners develop flexibility as they arrange ideas, which are not
in normal sequence. · Learners' reasoning skills are enhanced and they are able to
adapt to varied situations.
Digital Literacy: · Learners gain competence in ICT to support their own learning as well as encourage others. · Learners manage ideas using ICT.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways.
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings.
· negotiating conflicts constructively
· sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others.
· learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
· tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn.
· accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 139

Content Standards
2.4.1.CS.1 Develop, organise and express ideas coherently and cohesively in writing.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
2.4.1.LI.1 Use an extended range of cohesive devices (e.g., connectors to show contrast, results etc.) to improve inter-paragraph coherence.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials (sample
essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure of a linear narrative essay: i. Introductory paragraph containing: · Central Idea (for the essay) · Supporting sentences (to serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs) ii. Body paragraphs (containing main ideas--topic sentences) iii. Concluding paragraph · Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs.

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay)

Assessment
2.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

140 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as, until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion.
· Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding paragraphs.
· Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
2.4.1.LI.2
Develop a paragraph, focusing on the elements of coherence--direct references and transitional words.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials (sample
essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure of a linear narrative essay; i. Introductory paragraph containing: · Central Idea (for the whole essay) · Supporting sentences (To serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs). ii. Body paragraphs (Containing main ideas (topic sentences), iii. Concluding paragraph · Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs.

2.4.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 141

Teaching and Learning Resources

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as, until
etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion · Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding
paragraphs. · Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
· Sample essay · Passages from books, · Journals
Sample texts from social media · Story map etc.

142 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards 2.4.1.CS.2 Create different paragraphs within a composition on a given topic.
Teaching and Learning Resources

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
2.4.1.LI.1 Critically analyse and compose concluding paragraphs on a given topic.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · In mixed ability groups, learners examine sample essays (sample essays and passages from books,
journals and the internet) to identify their features. · Learners, in their groups, plan and develop non-linear narrative essays focusing on the elements of
unity, coherence and paragraph completeness with appropriate transitional expressions. · In the same or different mixed ability groups, learners compose essays in which events are not
presented sequentially but rather mixed so that events are linked through flashbacks and other literary techniques such as suspense and foreshadowing to develop the plot of the narrative. · In writing the story, learners may use first person, second person and third person (third-person omniscient or limited perspective), to represent the voice of the person telling the story (narrator). Revise and edit the writing for sense or meaning, and effect (emotional reaction). Proofread to selfcorrect or peer-edit. Publish or present in various media including ICT and on the various notice boards on the school's premises. Learners refer to books and the internet for examples of cohesive devices such as Time clauses, Conditional clauses, Purpose clauses, Reason clauses, Result clauses, Clauses of Concessive, etc. This search on the Internet will enhance their technology skills. · Learners work collaboratively and employ appealing strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs. E.g. restating, by paraphrasing, the central idea of the entire essay and supporting ideas. · Learners peer evaluate what they have written. · Working in groups, learners acquire the value of contributing to a common goal. · The following skills are also acquired: communication and collaboration, critical thinking and problem solving, innovation and creativity and leadership and collaboration.
· Sample essays and passages from books · Journals and the Internet.

Assessment
2.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 143

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
2. TEXT TYPES AND PURPOSES

Learning Outcomes
2.4.2.LO.1 Apply a procedural method to create texts that are descriptive, imaginative, persuasive and argumentative.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words
is enhanced.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners convince others to accept their points of views by
using appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners categorise ideas for easy consumption of an audience.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to
communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating
appropriately to their audience.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings.

144 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· negotiating conflicts constructively · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

2.4.2.LO.2
Create minutes,Reports,Articles of local and international newspapers on assigned topics ,adhering to the appropriate formatting guidelines.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners appreciate views from diverse perspectives and can
apply those viewpoints meaningfully. · Learners interact dynamically in various situations. · Learners tolerate the views of others and find appropriate
language to talk to one another.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners put non-sequential ideas together in a logical manner. · Learners find solutions when faced with difficult situations.
Innovation and Creativity: · Learners are empowered to perceive ideas from different angles. · Learners are put ideas together in order to develop innovative
concepts.

GESI: Working in collaborative ways in an environment that promotes gender equality and social inclusion will ensure: · respect for other individuals of
different linguistic backgrounds. · embracing diversity and practice
inclusion. · the examination and dispel of
misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogation of stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 145

Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners develop initiatives in solving societal problems. · Learners motivate one another in solving problems. · Learners gain expertise to lay foundations for professional
development.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving Skills: · Learners develop flexibility as they arrange ideas, which are not
in normal sequence. · Learners' reasoning skills are enhanced and they are able to
adapt to varied situations.
Digital Literacy: · Learners gain competence in ICT to support their own learning as well as encourage others. · Learners are able to manage ideas using ICT.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings
· negotiating conflicts constructively · Sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

146 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
2.4.2.CS.1 Use a process approach to compose descriptive, narrative/imaginative, informational, persuasive and argumentative texts.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
2.4.2.LI.1 Write short stories, using sensory language (imagery) to convey a vivid picture of experiences, events, setting, and/or characters.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials
(sample essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure of a linear narrative essay: i. Introductory paragraph containing: · Central Idea (for the essay) · Supporting sentences (to serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs). ii. Body paragraphs (containing main ideas--topic sentences), iii. Concluding paragraph · Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs.

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills.

Assessment
2.4.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 147

148 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion · Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding
paragraphs. Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
2.4.2.LI.2 Write a persuasive text (e.g. debate) that states and defends a position and responds to objections raised about it.
Collaborative Learning: Work in pairs to plan and compose an argumentative essay.
Initiating Talk for Learning: Using think-pair-share, learners collaboratively discuss ideas for their essay.
Process Approach: Learners in mixed groups, go through the process of writing an argumentative essay.

2.4.2.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: Argumentation is a critical quality of self-development and leadership, which learners will acquire in the learning activity. Logic and critical-thinking skills are also acquired as learners analyse their topic before writing and evaluating what has been written. Evaluating and analysing points in their writing will enable learners to think critically and creatively, anticipate consequences, recognise opportunities and be risk takers.
2.4.2.LI.3 Compose texts to compare and contrast given issues or situations.
Experiential Learning: · Learners are placed in mixed groups to debate. The winner of each round meets another group
until the best group emerges. · Learners choose their own speakers and judges. · Each group writes out the speeches for the debate based on the given topic with suitable
vocatives, persuasive language, and rhetorical questions.

2.4.2.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning

· The ideas are well arranged, systematically, from the beginning to the end.

Talk for Learning: Learners in small groups discuss a given topic for a debate.

Teaching and Learning Resources

Structuring Talk for Learning: Learners, in their mixed ability groups, use concept maps to illustrate their ideas for and against a given topic.
· Sample essay · Passages from books · Journals · Sample texts from social media · Story map etc.

Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 149

Content Standards
2.4.2.CS.2 Apply writing skills to specific life situations.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
2.4.2.LI.1 Compose minutes and reports on given topics using appropriate format.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · In mixed ability groups, learners examine sample essays (sample essays and passages from books,
journals and the internet) to identify their features. · Learners, in their groups, plan and develop non-linear narrative essays focusing on the elements
of unity, coherence and paragraph completeness with appropriate transitional expressions. · In the same or different mixed ability groups, learners compose essays in which events are not
presented sequentially but rather mixed so that events are linked through flashbacks and other literary techniques such as suspense and foreshadowing to develop the plot of the narrative. · In writing the story, learners may use first person, second person and third person (third-person omniscient or limited perspective) to represent the voice of the person telling the story (narrator). Revise and edit the writing for sense or meaning, and effect (emotional reaction). Proofread to self-correct or peer-edit. Publish or present in various media including ICT and on the various notice boards on the school's premises. Learners refer to books and the internet for examples of cohesive devices such as Time clauses, Conditional clauses, Purpose clauses, Reason clauses, Result clauses, Clauses of Concessive, etc. This search on the Internet will enhance their technology skills. · Learners work collaboratively and employ appealing strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs. E.g. restating, by paraphrasing, the central idea of the entire essay and supporting ideas. · Learners peer evaluate what they have written. · Working in groups, learners acquire the value of contributing to a common goal. · The following skills are also acquired: communication and collaboration, critical thinking and problem solving, innovation and creativity and leadership and collaboration.

Assessment
2.4.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

150 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

2.4.2.LI.2 Write articles on given issues for publication in international newspapers and magazines.
Experiential Learning: · Learners are placed in mixed groups to debate. The winner of each round meets another group
until the best group emerges. · Learners choose their own speakers and judges. · Each group writes out the speeches for the debate based on the given topic with suitable
vocatives, persuasive language, and rhetorical questions. · The ideas are well arranged systematically from the beginning to the end.

2.4.2.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Talk for Learning: Learners in small groups discuss a given topic for a debate.

Teaching and Learning Resources

Structuring Talk for Learning: Learners in their mixed ability groups use concept maps to illustrate their ideas for and against a given topic.
· Sample essays and passages from books · Journals and the Internet

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 151

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
3. BUILDING AND PRESENTING KNOWLEDGE

Learning Outcomes
2.4.3.LO.1 Gather information from both printed and digital sources, employing in-text referencing and citation techniques, to effectively structure and present it in written form.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words
is enhanced.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners convince others to accept their points of view by using
appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners categorise ideas for easy consumption for an audience.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to
communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating
appropriately to their audience.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways.
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings.

152 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions. National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 153

Content Standards
1.4.1.CS.1 Research to build and present knowledge.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.4.1.LI.1 Retrieve information from print and digital sources using in-text referencing and citation to organise and present in writing.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials
(sample essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure of a linear narrative essay: i. Introductory paragraph containing: · Central Idea (for the essay) · Supporting sentences (to serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs). ii. Body paragraphs (containing main ideas--topic sentences), iii. Concluding paragraph · Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs.

Assessment
1.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills.

154 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc.), suitable background information and a conclusion · Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding
paragraphs. · Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
· Sample essay · Passages from books · Journals · Sample texts from social media · Story map etc.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 155

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
5. LITERATURE
1. POETRY, NARRATIVE AND DRAMA

Learning Outcomes 2.5.1.LO.1 Analyse different types of poems.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners identify thematic issues in poems and utilise
this in communicating with others. · Learners develop skills of oratory.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners develop flexibility as they arrange ideas,
which are not in normal sequence. · Learners' reasoning skills are enhanced and they are
able to adapt to varied situations.

GESI: Collaborating as a team in an inclusive way, sharing knowledge to promote understanding among groups and individuals leads to: · respect individuals of different linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and
language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the
contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects
of life.

SEL: · Recognition of one's own behaviour to make informed
judgement. · Negotiate conflict constructively. · Cooperate with others. · Appreciate the poem devoid of personal sentiments
and biases. · Sharing opinions with one another. · Learn to interact with others in meaningful ways.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination,

156 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

2.5.1.LO.2
Analyse common themes that make up poems./Analyse common themes in poems.

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners analyse poems and other texts for their
underlying meanings to solve problems effectively. · Learners evaluate societal issues by applying the
knowledge acquired in examining poems.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners identify themes, appropriate them as leaders
and apply them in their leadership roles. · Learners acquire the rhetorical strategies in poems
and apply this in their own communication.

friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and
language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the
contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: Consciously develop the learning strategies that ensure that learners: · share their opinions to grow in awareness of their own
emotional reactions. · notice the facial expressions and posture of others as
they share their experiences. · ask questions that relate to the actions of people in
texts and stories. · learn to interact with others in meaningful and positive
ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerate the views of others.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 157

2.5.1.LO.3
Apply imagery and figurative language in texts.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners craft their own communication in language
that can appeal to their audience.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners individually or in groups identify the
importance of imagery in personal communication. · Learners apply imagery when communicating as
leaders to appeal to their audience.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic, beliefs,
religions and cultural backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and
language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the
contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life
SEL: · Share their opinions to grow in awareness of their own
emotional reactions. · Notice the facial expressions and posture of others as
they share their experiences. · Ask questions that relate to the actions of people in
texts and stories. · Learn to interact with others in meaningful and positive
ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · Tolerate the views of others.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

158 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
2.5.1.CS.1 Demonstrate understanding of how various elements of literary genres facilitate the understanding of a text.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 2.5.1.LI.1 Respond and appreciate different types of non-African poems.
Experiential Learning: Compare the structure and language of two non-African poems by different poets in mixed ability groups and explore how the writers portray meaning.
Talk for Learning Approaches: Using the talk for learning approach, learners in mixed ability groups, create poems using appropriate language, structures and techniques identified in the poems used earlier to convey meaning.
1. Peer-edit and analyse poems created. 2. Learners perform poems in class. 3. Publish the poems on notice boards in the school, school magazine, etc.

Assessment
2.5.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

Communication and Collaboration Skills: Learners in their mixed ability groups, perform their poems orally and explore the meaning. Learners take into consideration diction, intonation and punctuations as well as tolerance and respect for one another.

· Level appropriate non-African poems
· Learner made/created poems

· Level-appropriate texts · Selected passages

· Learner-made texts

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 159

Content Standards
2.5.1.CS.2 Demonstrate understanding of how various elements of literary genres facilitate the understanding of a text

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 2.5.1.LI.1 Explore common themes in poems.
Using Warm-up Games: Learners sit in a circle and choose a word--everyone must take turns coming up with a rhyme but if they repeat a word or take too long, the game is over. It's just a fun little way to start off the class.
Talk for Learning: Learners in mixed ability groupings compare how a common theme is presented in different poems. Learners need to tolerate one another's views in the discussion.

Build on What Others Say: Learners in pairs, build on what others say to elaborate their points/ideas about the poems they compared without any restrictions.

Experiential Learning: Learners in their convenient groups, select a theme and present in another form (poetry, story etc.) in a collaborative manner.

Think-Pair-Share: Using think-square-pair, have learners present their final ideas in their convenient groups respecting diverse ideas.

2.5.1.LI.2 Use Imagery (expressive and figurative language) in texts.

Collaborative Learning: Learners work collaboratively in pairs to identify the structure of expressive and figurative language to create images and atmosphere in texts.

Experiential Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups, explore the use of imagery (literary devices) using a text, poem or story for role-play or dialogue. Learners take note of respect and diversity of ideas.

Task-Based Learning: Create a performance text using imagery for play or stage.

Assessment
2.5.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning
2.5.1.AS.2 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

160 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Level appropriate texts/ passages · Learner-made texts · Texts chosen should cover both feminine and masculine gender characters · Text should be simple for learners to identify imagery and figurative language easily

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 161

YEAR THREE
162 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
1. ENGLISH SPEECH SOUNDS

Learning Outcomes 3.1.1.LO.1 Articulate paralinguistic features (stress, intonation) effectively in oral communication.

21st Century Skills and Competencies
Communication and Collaboration: · Learners communicate with clarity and confidence. · Learners cultivate team spirit and work
collaboratively.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: Learners develop critical-thinking skills by reflecting on key properties of speech such as stress that result in meaningful communication.

GESI5, SEL6 and Shared National Values
GESI: Collaborating and communicating well in a team in an inclusive way, leads to: · being aware of personal biases and stereotypes. · embracing diversity and practice inclusion. · peaceful coexistence among different religions,
cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · building and maintaining healthy social relationships. · good team spirit and unity among learners in diverse communication settings.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · respecting individual capabilities and adapt to the
needs of others in different social settings. · resolving interpersonal conflicts with each other.
· tolerating one another in a group as they communicate and collaborate with one another.
· learning from others and respect each other's views and opinions in diverse speech context.
· understanding, relating to and being sensitive to others' choice of words in both academic and social discourses.

5 Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 6 Socio-Emotional Learning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 163

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
164 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
3.1.1.CS.1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of speech sounds in oral communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.1.1.LI.1 Use stress appropriately in sentences and in disyllabic and polysyllabic words.
Collaborative Learning: Learners work in their mixed-ability groups to reflect on other properties of speech (e.g., stress), which extend beyond the individual sound segments (vowels and consonants). With appropriate examples, learners come to understand how stress (placing prominence) on certain words or parts of a word (syllable) aids in communicating meaningfully. This activity will make learners communicate with clarity and confidence in different communicative contexts, develop team spirit and embrace diversity.
Class Discussion: · Learners listen to a model text (teacher led, tape recorded, YouTube video, etc.) uttered in level
tone, with no emphasis on content or main words. · Learners listen and reflect on the text, record their observations, and note the reactions of their
peers, using the following questions: Example: Does the reading of the text sound monotonous or not? Does it sound right or not? Does it sound natural or not? · Learners listen to a second reading or recording of the same text with emphasis on content or main words and note down their own and or peers' reactions with the guide of these questions: e.g., does laying emphasis on certain words in the text sound more natural, smooth and meaningful? · In pairs, learners identify the words, which are stressed and those that are not stressed. E.g, content words are stressed and grammatical words are not stressed. · In pairs, learners refer to appropriate reference materials (e.g. dictionary) to observe stress marking on disyllabic and polysyllabic words. · In groups, learners listen to model oral texts (teacher led, tape recording, YouTube video, etc.) to observe stress marking in natural conversation. · In pairs, learners take turns to read out model texts, emphasising the stressed syllable/words. · Individually, learners do a recording of their reading of a text. · Learners then play the recorded reading to themselves paying attention to their articulation of stressed/unstressed syllables, content and grammatical words in connected speech. · Learners are guided to appreciate the different competencies of individuals and learn to communicate effectively in English.

Assessment
3.1.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 165

3.1.1.LI.2 Use intonation appropriately for different communicative functions.
Collaborative Learning: · Learners in their mixed-ability groups, communicate confidently by employing varied intonation
patterns to express different meanings as they learn from their peers, understand, and respect their needs, perspectives and actions. · Learners in pairs/small groups, pick a familiar word (come, go, etc.) or a sentence (Where are you going? They did not come., etc.). Note: The word/sentence should be accompanied by one or two scenarios (You are asking a question; You are angry; You need confirmation, etc.). · With the same word/sentence, learners then practice how to depict the various scenarios or emotions/moods/feelings, using a rising or falling intonation. · Learners practise more rising/falling intonation from word/sentence cards or audio texts to express different communicative functions. · Through this, learners will learn to work in groups to tolerate others' opinions and embrace diversity as they use the English Language.

3.1.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

Note: Learners should be encouraged to sound natural.
· Audio recordings · Visual aids such as sound charts (i.e. sounds in different colour backgrounds), pictures, props, regalia, etc. · Minimal pair aids · Materials such as pictures or books with speech sounds, dictionaries (print/audio) · Audio-visual aids e.g. YouTube videos, television, recording devices (tape recorders, mobile phones), etc.

166 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
2. LISTENING COMPREHENSION

Learning Outcomes
3.1.2.LO.1 Evaluate key information from level appropriate oral texts.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners listen carefully to others in any communicative process. · Learners foster teamwork and collaboration to communicate well.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners evaluate any message to identify the salient issues. · Learners draw effective conclusions to respond appropriately to
any situation.
Lifelong Learning: · Learners acquire valuable listening skills for lifelong learning and
become adept at listening in all social interactions, including electronic communication. · Listening encourages camaraderie, teamwork, and collaboration, all of which lead to better communication abilities.

GESI: Collaborating and communicating well in a team in an inclusive way, as well as listening attentively to others leads to: · being aware of personal biases and
stereotypes · embracing diversity and practice
inclusion · peaceful coexistence among
different religions, cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · building and maintaining healthy social relationships. · good team spirit and unity among learners in diverse communication settings.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · respecting individual capabilities and
adapt to the needs of others in different social settings. · resolving interpersonal conflicts with each other.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 167

168 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· tolerating one another in a group as they communicate and collaborate with one another.
· learning from others and respect each other's views and opinions in diverse speech context.
· understanding, relating to and being sensitive to others' choice of words in both academic and social discourses.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, openmindedness, patience, hard work, humility

Content Standards
3.1.2.CS.1 Demonstrate the ability to listen critically, extract and construct varied levels of meaning from any oral communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.1.2.LI.1 Form judgements and share opinions on varied interactive texts with other speakers in class.
Talk for Learning: · Learners in their mixed ability groups engage in meaningful discussion on a text. Learners take
turns to share their opinions on the text with their peers. · Use the following leading questions to guide learners listen to and infer the main concept from an
oral text (audio recordings, movies, stories, narrations, etc.) that is appropriate for their level .E.g, 1. What does the speaker (or speakers) relate to? 2. What information does the speaker want me to have? Etc. 3. Who are the story's main characters? What are the settings, and events? · Learners, in turns, share their understanding of issues raised in the text, while their peers also play the role of listeners.

Assessment
3.1.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: All learners must be encouraged to share their opinions. Learners should practise the policy of `no response is wrong' and tolerate others' opinions, while developing leadership skills that will be beneficial in their social interactions.
3.1.2.LI.2 Use question techniques to discuss level appropriate oral texts.
Building on What Others Say: Learners in their mixed-ability groups learn from each other by reflecting on what individuals have said and asking critical questions to build on what others have said. Through this, learners develop their communication and collaboration skills while using genderresponsive language.
Example: 5-Whys activity: · Learners in small groups use questions to critically interrogate opinions shared by their peers on
stories read/listened to. · Learners then engage in a class discussion, to critically ask questions enabling them to reflect on
their peers' responses, in relation to their prior knowledge and previous experiences.

3.1.2.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 169

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Learners develop critical thinking and problem-solving skills as they extract and reflect on the meaning of the texts. Learners by this activity enhance their personal and leadership skills.
· Audio recordings · Visual aids such as sound charts (i.e. sounds in different colour backgrounds), pictures, props, realia, etc. · Minimal pair aids · Materials such as pictures or books with speech sounds, dictionaries (print/audio) · Audio-visual aids e.g. YouTube videos, television, recording devices (tape recorders, mobile phones), etc.

170 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
1. ORAL LANGUAGE
3. CONVERSATION/COMMUNICATION

Learning Outcomes 3.1.3.LO.1 Use effective strategies to engage in extensive talk on both local and global issues.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners use conversational strategies they have learned to
communicate effectively in a variety of contexts. · Learners cooperate with one another utilising appropriate
word choices in their everyday language through pair or group discussions. · Learners collaborate with peers when they create and enact speech together.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners unearth their creativity and critical-thinking skills
through impromptu speech delivery and other types of speech. · Learners apply critical-thinking skills to lessen the likelihood of interpersonal disputes occasioned by misinterpreted language.

GESI: Collaborating and communicating well in a team in an inclusive way, as well as listening attentively to others leads to: · peaceful coexistence among different religions,
cultures, diverse linguistic backgrounds and people with special needs. · building and maintaining healthy social relationships. · good team spirit and unity among learners in diverse communication setting
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · respecting individual capabilities and adapt to
the needs of others in different social settings. · resolving interpersonal conflicts with each
other. · tolerating one another in a group as they
communicate and collaborate with one another. · learning from others and respect one another's views and opinions in diverse speech context. · understanding, relating to and being sensitive to others' choice of words in both academic and social discourses.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 171

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
172 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
3.1.3.CS.1 Demonstrate effective use of communicative strategies in a variety of speech situations.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.1.3.LI.1 Identify and discuss various styles and strategies of speech delivery.
Talk for Learning (TFL): · Learners brainstorm different types of speech situations (e.g: prepared/scripted,
extemporaneous, memorised, etc.) and cite specific examples of each. · Learners think-pair-share the various speech styles (formal, casual, consultative, etc.) and
strategies of speech delivery.

E.g., Learners should be mindful of the following: · Verbal skills: style, volume, speed/pace, pauses, voice modulation, enunciation, etc. · Non-verbal skills: eye contact, gestures, facial expressions, movements, mannerisms, etc.

Assessment
3.1.3.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

· Learners in their mixed-ability groups engage in extensive talk on given topics, of both local and global relevance. Learners with little support confidently present their thoughts on issues that span across different fields, including STEM. Through this, learners become creative and confident in doing individual presentations on given issues/topics and also willing to lead group presentations in class.
· Learners, individually/in pairs, create and present different types of speech on different topics.
3.1.3.LI.2 Ask and respond to critical questions about topical issues happening both locally and globally.
Building on What Others Say: In dialogues, learners question given structures in society and meaningfully interact with their peers on such local and global issues.
Pick & Speak: · Learners, individually/in pairs/in groups, pick topic cards from a group of cards and speak to the
issue written on the card. · Learners communicate using words carefully by considering the gender, ethnicity, status, and
preferences of other speakers.

3.1.3.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 173

Teaching and Learning Resources

· A list of level-appropriate topics for discussions · Short passages or stories (e.g. page turners) · Visuals, audio tapes, audio-visuals · A list of level-appropriate topics for discussion (written on cards) · Conversation practice games · Wall pictures about different scenes, audio visuals about a particular situation or profession, short drama or role play by
two or more characters

174 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
2. READING
1. READING COMPREHENSION

Learning Outcomes 3.2.1.LO.1 Employ knowledge of text comprehension strategies and levels of text comprehension to analyse and interpret different kinds of texts

21st Century Skills and Competencies
Communication and Collaboration: Learners, working in groups, can share ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners engage in critical thinking and problem solving as
they interact with selected texts. · Learners develop problem-solving skills as they apply
various reading strategies. · Learners think critically to reflect on their learning.

Creativity and Innovation: · Learners develop creative skills as they analyse texts and
come up with ideas in responding to texts. · Learners create and critique one another's text.

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender
and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the
contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various
aspects of life.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · developing relationships that make learners
sensitive to one another's feelings. · writing collaboratively. · interacting with others in meaningful ways. · accepting responsibility for their actions. · accepting roles and responsibilities that help
learners develop leadership skills.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 175

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

3.2.1.LO.2 Exhibit increasing confidence and interest in independent reading and text analysis.

Communication and Collaboration: Learners enhance their communication and collaboration skills as they work together in their groups.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: Learners develop problem- solving skills when dealing with the complexity of texts.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender
and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the
contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various
aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · developing relationships that make learners
sensitive to one another's feelings. · writing collaboratively. · interacting with others in meaningful ways. · accepting responsibility for their actions. · accepting roles and responsibilities that help
learners develop leadership skills.

176 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 177

Content Standards
3.2.1.CS.1 Demonstrate understanding of different types of reading strategies and use them to interact with a variety of level appropriate texts.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.2.1.LI.1 Explore more advanced comprehension text strategies to enhance comprehension and interaction with a variety of complex texts.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Learners use advanced text comprehension strategies to analyse and interpret a variety of texts for enhanced comprehension.
Reciprocal Teaching as a Collaborative Strategy · Learners work collaboratively to read a text or section of a text together as a class. · The text must be devoid of gender bias language and characters to enable learners to interrogate
their own stereotype about gender. · Start with a short, simple-structure text and move to complex and lengthy texts as learners
become familiar with the strategy · In mixed ability/mixed gender groups of four, learners work collaboratively to analyse a text with
each group member being assigned a specific task: 1. The Questioner (responsible for formulating two questions based on the text) 2. The Clarifier (responsible for finding two unknown words or ideas in the text) 3. The Summarizer (responsible for drawing a picture that represents the main idea of the text)
and 4. The Predictor (responsible for predicting what might happen if the text was to continue).

Assessment
3.2.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

· Learners listen to the teacher walk them through the Reciprocal Teaching Worksheets and without talking to any member of the group, each learner works independently on his/her worksheet to complete their portions of the first part of the worksheet.

Talk for Learning: · Learners work collaboratively to critically discuss and complete the second part of the worksheet. · Groups start with the questioner box, finding answers to the Questioner's two questions. · Next, the groups work together to define or explain the Clarifier's unknown words or ideas. · The Summariser then shows the group his or her picture. The rest of the group works together to
draw a similar picture on their worksheets.

178 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· They collaboratively write two or three-sentence summary under the picture. · The group learns to tolerate and respect one another's views. · Finally, the Predictor reveals his or her prediction and the group members record the prediction
on their own papers. · Then the group works together to find evidence in the text that supports the prediction.
· Leadership roles should be assigned to both male and female members to enable learners to challenge traditional gender roles and advocate for inclusion.
· The groups share their work with the rest of the class for peer review and to reflect on what they have learnt as well as how they have learnt it.
Talk for Learning (TFL): Metacognitive strategies · Learners apply metacognitive strategies to critically analyse complex texts. · Learners practise this close reading activity on short but complex texts. They read the text three
times. · Text must be devoid of gender bias language to enable learners embrace gender equality. · Learners do the first reading independently and silently focusing on key ideas and details by using
metacognitive markers in the margin of the text (to indicate what is not clear and how it will be made clearer, e.g. it will be reread, the preceding paragraphs will be read for a clue, etc.). · Learners do the second reading by focusing on the craft and structure of the text. · They listen to the teacher read the text aloud. Learners in turn circle unknown words, highlight main ideas and underline key details as examples of activities for focusing on meaning · In mixed ability/mixed gender groups, learners do the third reading to synthesise and apply information from the text by answering text-based questions, connecting the text to other sources of information (self, another text or the world) or analyse specific literary devices as examples of text analysis activities. · Learners share their work with other members of the class for peer feedback (to enable learners develop problem solving competences).
Experiential Learning: Learners use a combination of reading and text comprehension strategies learnt in the lower classes to interact with a variety of texts appropriately.
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 179

180 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· Learners read a variety of texts (fiction or nonfiction), ranging from simple to complex and more complex structures silently using a combination of text comprehension strategies learnt earlier to enhance their comprehension. ü Learners can predict a text, skim the text for the gist; scan for specific answers, read the text closely for deeper understanding, visualize the text as they read to enhance their understanding, etc.
· Learners identify and classify questions asked on each of the passages according to their types; and work in pairs to answer each question appropriately.
· Ask questions that will make learners answer a variety of questions: literal, inferential, critical (evaluation) questions as well as vocabulary and lexical questions on given texts.

3.2.1.LI.2 Extensively read and analyse a variety of texts.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Learners use Collaborative Annotation to analyse and appreciate a variety of texts. · In mixed ability/mixed gender groups of 3-5 members, learners listen to the teacher read a text
aloud and lead them to critically annotate (write their thoughts about the text on a copy of the text) the text. · The text should be simple yet highly interesting and devoid of gender and inclusive bias statements. · Learners sit around the text reading it silently and analysing it collaboratively by writing their comments about the texts in the margin. (e.g., The main character in this text is....) · Learners can interact with one another only via writing. · Have each group member write his/her name in a different colour and write comments in the margin of the text using the same colour. · Go round with your own coloured pen and make comments for groups to respond to. Ask learners questions (on paper) about their thoughts related to an issue in the text (e.g., Why do you think the rich king wants to take the small country?) · At the end of the activity, groups share their responses (annotations) with the class orally while the rest listen and make inputs. · Learners should be encouraged to appreciate the different competences of individual groups. · Females and males should be assigned group leadership to enable learners challenge traditional gender roles. · Learners critique one another's work to enable them develop problem solving competence.

3.2.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

3.2.1.LI.3 Create extension for a variety of texts.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: Learners read and create an extension for a variety of texts including poems. · Learners listen to a popular story (possibly from one of their Core Literature books) read aloud to
them by the teacher. · Working in pairs, learners brainstorm and collaboratively create an extension for the story. · Each pair shares their story with another pair and together they review their ideas and revise the
extension to make it better. · Groups should be encouraged to tolerate and respect each member's views.

3.2.1.AS.3
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

Gallery Walk · Each group pastes their extension on the classroom walls for a gallery walk. · Learners critique one another's work positively after the gallery walk. · Give learners the opportunity to create an extension for a variety of literary works (prose, drama
or poem) in a similar manner.

· Copies of a variety of texts for collaborative annotation activities
· A variety of coloured markers or pens

· A variety of texts including drama and poems

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 181

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
2. READING
2. SUMMARISING

Learning Outcomes 3.2.2.LO.1 Engage advanced strategies to summarise a variety of texts (with simple and complex structures).

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: Learners develop communication and collaboration skills from working in groups and contributing to discussions.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: Learners apply critical thinking skills when they are engaged in working on texts of varying difficulty, by applying summary writing strategies.
Leadership and Personal Development: Learners act as leaders of their groups, working towards solving the given tasks. Through this, they develop self-confidence in dealing with such tasks while learning to work with team members.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and can: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.
· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.
· identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must consciously be integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · developing relationships that make learners
sensitive to one another's feelings. · writing collaboratively. · interacting with others in meaningful ways.
· accepting responsibility for their actions.

182 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· accepting roles and responsibilities that help learners develop leadership skills.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 183

Content Standards
3.2.2.CS.1 Demonstrate in-depth understanding of texts of varied lengths.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.2.2.LI.1 Apply strategies for summarising a variety of texts.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · Learners write a summary of given texts by giving a brief outline or synopsis of the text's main
points in their own words. · Learners silently and critically read a given text using their preferred close reading strategies to
enhance comprehension. · Texts should be devoid of gender and inclusion bias language to enable learners to embrace
inclusion and gender equality. · Learners work collaboratively in mixed ability/mixed gender groups to break the paragraphs of
the texts into main ideas and supporting ideas. · Learners should be encouraged to respect and tolerate individual views to enable them to
embrace diversity of opinions as depicted by their personality. · Learners apply a variety of summarising strategies learnt at the lower grades to summarise the
text. · Groups reflect on the task and share what they have done with the class for peer feedback.
They talk about the strategies that worked for them and those that did not, giving reasons.

Assessment
3.2.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: Start with simple (to understand) informational texts. Text should be short and be on a topic that will interest learners, (e.g., holiday events, dealing with adolescent problems, etc.). Ensure the text is devoid of gender bias language to enable learners interrogate their own stereotype about gender.
3.2.2.LI.2 Answer a variety of summary questions on texts of varied lengths.
Experiential Learning: · Learners read a variety of texts, including extracts from Core Literature books and answer
summary questions on them. · Working in mixed ability/mixed gender groups, learners collaboratively read the introductory
and concluding paragraphs of a given text to predict what the text is about. · Learners critically read the whole text closely to gain a better understanding of the text.

3.2.2.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

184 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

· In response to probing questions, learners analyse and filter the silly details of each paragraph from the important details.
E.g., Which sentence in this paragraph do you think carries the message of the paragraph (the topic sentence)?
· Which sentences explain the topic sentence or give examples of what the message of the topic sentence is? Are there some sentences in the paragraph that are not?
· Based on this analysis, learners summarise paragraphs into several sentences. · Give learners the opportunity to practise answering a variety of summary questions this way. · Group leadership should be assigned to both male and female members to enable learners
challenge traditional gender roles.
· Copies of a variety of texts for collaborative annotation activities · A variety of texts including drama and poems · A variety of texts (informational and fiction) of varied length and levels of difficulty. · Informational texts should be drawn from STEM and other cross-curricular fields. · A variety of texts for practising summarising including extracts from the Core Literature set books (texts should be
devoid of gender bias language to enable learners to embrace gender equality)

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 185

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
3. GRAMMAR USAGE
1. GRAMMAR

Learning Outcomes 3.3.1.LO.1 Identify and use the different types of phrases/clauses in speech and creative writing.

21st Century Skills and Competencies
Communication and Collaboration: · Learners collaborate and learn from one another. · Learners communicate effectively by employing various
clause types.

Digital Literacy: By watching videos and discussing topics, learners gain familiarity with the use of technological tools and their usefulness.

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings. · negotiating conflicts constructively.

186 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others.
· learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
· tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn.
· accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

3.3.1.LO.2 Identify forms and use phrasal verbs to create meaning in speech and writing.

Communication and Collaboration: Working together in groups and pairs, learners collaborate and learn from their peers.
Digital Literacy: By watching videos and discussing topics, learners gain familiarity and competence with the use of technological tools.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 187

3.3.1.LO.3 Apply the knowledge and use idiomatic expressions in speech and writing.

integrated in the teaching and learning process through: · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings. · negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners skilfully apply idiomatic expressions in various
communicative contexts. · Working together in groups and pairs learners
collaborate and communicate with and learn from their peers.
Digital Literacy: Learners gain competence in the use of technological tools by browsing the internet to watch videos and play games to enhance their use of idiomatic expressions.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · Interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.

188 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

3.3.1.LO.4 Apply knowledge of rules when converting indirect speech to direct speech and vice versa.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners deploy the appropriate language to
communicate desirably to their audience. · Learners support one another for effective teamwork. · Learners use language to foster friendly relationships.

· Identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings. · negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 189

190 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Digital Literacy: · Learners browse the Internet for more information to
write their speech. · Learners deploy digital skills acquired in other spheres
of life.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners evaluate issues and determine the systematic
or logical sequence in which issues must be presented in a speech. · Learners think logically and creatively, anticipate challenges, identify opportunities and are risk takers.

· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.
· identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings. · negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing opinions to grow in awareness of their
own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility

Content Standards
3.3.1.CS.1 Apply the knowledge of Phrases and Clauses and their functions in communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.3.1.LI.1 Use a wider range of phrases and clauses appropriately in context.
Experiential Learning: Learners in mixed gender groups collaboratively work in teams to identify and use grammatical forms accurately in writing and in speech. E.g, In convenient groups learners identify noun clauses as subject/object/ complement/appositives in given sentences.

Collaborative Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups collaboratively work to construct sentences indicating noun clauses and their functions.

Problem-Based Learning: Learners in their mixed ability groups discuss effects of the use of noun clauses in simple texts.

Assessment
3.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

NB: Identification of a nominal (noun) clause ­ It is a clause, which as a result of its structure does the work of a noun in the sentences in which it is found. Identification of noun clauses as subjects, objects, complements:

Example: What you are saying is right (subject). I know (that) I was right (direct object). It seems (that) he will do it (complement).

Identification of types and functions of adverbial clauses. Example: Time, Place, Condition, Manner, Concession etc. Use of appropriate subordinating conjunctions to signal types.

Example: Time: I saw him when he arrived. Place: The sun shines where you are.

Concession: Although I spoke to him, he didn`t listen etc. Function: I saw him when he arrived ­ This modifies the verb 'saw` Types of complex adverbial clauses--proportion, purpose and comparison.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 191

Example: Proportion: As time went on so did their hopes begin to rise. Purpose: She studies hard so she will pass her examination. Comparison: I will work as hard as my friend does

Identification of adjective/ relative clauses - antecedent and its type of relative pronoun e.g. who/which/whom/ whose/that e.g. This is the lady who won the national prize for scientific invention.

I received the money, which you sent me.

Defining Relative Clause: Describe the preceding noun in a way as to make it different from other nouns of the same class. The students who came late were punished. The person who repairs the computer is here.
3.3.1.LI.2 Use phrases and clauses to convey specific meanings in contexts adding variety and interest to speech and writing.

Collaborative Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups collaboratively work to construct sentences indicating types of clauses and their functions.

Problem-Based Learning: Learners in their mixed ability groups analyse use of types clauses in speech and writing.

Teaching and

· Selected Passages

Learning Resources · Old newspapers

· YouTube videos

3.3.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

192 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
3.3.1.CS.2 Demonstrate mastery of the use of phrasal verbs.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 3.3.1.LI.1 Identify and determine the meaning of phrasal verbs in context.
Experiential/Collaborative Learning: Learners in convenient groups work collaboratively to revise the components of the simple/complex phrasal verbs and their meanings in texts.

Example: V + ADV, PREP look up to Come up with Stand up to Look up for

Collaborative Learning: Learners in gender groups collaboratively team up to identify phrasal verbs in given texts, determine what they mean and use them in developing meaningful paragraphs.

NOTE: Description of phrasal verbs.

Example: Verb + Adverb Look + into Take + off

The prefect was asked to look into the issue. Verb + Preposition put + away take + up She put away the dishes.

Problem-Based Learning: Learners work in convenient groups to brainstorm the types of complex patterns.

Assessment
3.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 193

Example: Verb + Adverbial + Preposition I won`t go in for such expensive clothes for school.

Verb + adv. + prep. If you work harder, you can catch up with the rest of the class.

Teaching and Learning Resources

Verb + object + prep. We can make room for two more guests.
· Copies of a variety of texts for collaborative annotation activities
· A variety of texts including drama and poems · A variety of texts (informational and fictional) of varied
length and levels of difficulty. · Informational texts should be drawn from STEM and
other cross-curricular fields.

· A variety of texts for practising summarising including extracts from the Core Literature set books (texts should be devoid of gender bias language to enable learners to embrace gender equality).
· Selected Passages · Old newspapers

194 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
3.3.1.CS.3 Demonstrate command of knowledge of idiomatic expressions in specific contexts.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 3.3.1.LI.1 Explain and identify idiomatic expressions in speech and writing.
Collaborative Learning: Ensuring tolerance for one another's views, learners work in mixed ability groups collaborating and communicating confidently by analysing the meaning of idiomatic expressions, complex phrasal verbs etc. in given passages.
Problem-Based Learning: Ensuring tolerance for each other's views, learners work in mixed ability groups to use proverbs, complex phrasal verbs and idiomatic expressions appropriately to convey specific meanings, adding variety and interest to enrich communication.

Assessment
3.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Selected Passages · Old newspapers · YouTube videos

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 195

Content Standards
3.3.1.CS.4 Understand and use direct and reported speeches appropriately.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.3.I.LI.1 Determine and use direct/indirect speech forms in context.
Collaborative Learning: Using conversion drills, learners dialogue converting direct speeches to indirect speeches and vice versa E.g, Razak: I`m tired. Aku: Razak says he is tired or Razak said he was tired.
Experiential Learning: Using role-play ensuring tolerance for one another's views, learners work in mixed ability groups collaborating and communicating verbally using materials from journalism and literature to report on direct and indirect speech.

Assessment
3.3.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and Learning Resources

Talk for Learning: Learners use pair conversation drills to distinguish and change samples of direct speeches into indirect/reported speeches encouraging active participation and tolerance.

· Selected Passages · Old newspapers

· YouTube videos · Sample Disc jockey... (The Radio Show)

196 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
3. GRAMMAR USAGE
2. VOCABULARY

Learning Outcomes 3.3.2.LO.1 Employ appropriate vocabulary in communication.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners employ appropriate vocabulary to
communicate effectively in various contexts. · Learners use language effectively in fostering
unity.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners analyse situations and employ
appropriate language in response to situations. · Learners communicate with the right choice of
language to diffuse tension in society.
Creativity and Innovation: · Learners recognise language as an art and
employ this to educate, inform, persuade and entertain. · Learners choose appropriate language to suit specific speech situations.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about
gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and
language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the
contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects
of life.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in diverse
communicative settings. · negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in awareness of their
own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 197

· tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn.
· accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility
198 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
3.3.2.CS.1 Demonstrate the appropriate use of vocabulary in communication.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.3.2.LI.1 Interpret and use vocabulary appropriately in more complex contexts.
Experiential Learning: · Learners cooperatively watch YouTube videos and create texts incorporating the appropriate
vocabulary and expressions effectively: Proverbs · Complex phrasal verbs · Idioms/ Idiomatic expressions · Sentence/Word cards

Assessment
3.3.2.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

3.3.2.LI.2 Interpret and use registers, proverbs, complex phrasal verbs, idioms and idiomatic expressions in more complex contexts to enrich communication.
Collaborative Learning: Learners in mixed ability groups collaborate and use proverbs, complex phrasal verbs, idiomatic expressions and registers to convey specific meaning and add variety, interest and richness to communication.

3.3.2.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Teaching and

· Sentence/word cards

Learning Resources · Videos with dialogues

· Role-play, audio, TV, films and narratives · Varieties of narrative texts and Passages

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 199

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
1. Production and Distribution of text

Learning Outcomes
3.4.1.LO.1 Compose paragraphs with varying content related to a specific subject.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate
words is enhanced.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners convince others to accept their points of views by
using appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners categorise ideas for easy consumption of an audience.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to
communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at
communicating appropriately to their audience.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways.
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings.

200 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions. National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 201

Content Standards
3.4.1.CS.1 Create different paragraphs within a composition on a given topic.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
3.4.1.LI.1 Consolidate the knowledge and skill in composing paragraphs on selected topics.
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups examine sample materials (sample
essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure: i. Introductory paragraph containing: · Central Idea (for the essay) · Supporting sentences (to serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs). ii. Body paragraphs (containing main ideas--topic sentences), iii. Concluding paragraph · Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs.

Assessment
3.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc., suitable background information and a conclusion.

202 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Teaching and Learning Resources

· Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding paragraphs.
· Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
· Sample essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media, story map etc.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 203

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
2. TEXT TYPES AND PURPOSES

Learning Outcomes

21st Century Skills and Competencies

3.4.2.LO.1 Craft captivating prose to express concepts, emotions and vivid mental landscapes.

Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words
is enhanced.

Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners convince others to accept their points of views by
using appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners categorise ideas for easy consumption of an audience.

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to
communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating
appropriately to their audience.

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways.

204 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

3.4.2.LO.2 Generate a curriculum vitae/resume, business proposal, and personal statement based on assigned subjects, employing the suitable structure and format.

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners appreciate views from diverse perspectives and can
apply those viewpoints meaningfully. · Learners interact dynamically in various situations. · Learners tolerate the views of others and find appropriate
language to talk to one another.

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners put non-sequential ideas together in a logical manner. · Learners find solutions when faced with difficult situations.

· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings.
· negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
GESI: Working in collaborative ways in an environment that promotes gender equality and social inclusion will ensure: · respect for other individuals of
different linguistic backgrounds. · embracing diversity and practice
inclusion. · the examination and dispel of
misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 205

Innovation and Creativity: · Learners are empowered to perceive ideas from different angles. · Learners put ideas together in order to develop innovative
concepts.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners develop initiatives in solving societal problems. · Learners motivate one another in solving problems. · Learners gain expertise to lay foundations for professional
development.
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving Skills: · Learners develop flexibility as they arrange ideas, which are not
in normal sequence. · Learners' reasoning skills are enhanced and they are able to
adapt to varied situations.
Digital Literacy: · Learners gain competence in ICT to support their own learning
as well as encourage others. · Learners are able to manage ideas using ICT.

· interrogation of stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their schools, homes and communities.
SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways. · developing habits of turn-taking in
diverse communicative settings. · negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions.

National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork

206 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards
1.4.1.CS.1 Use a process approach to compose descriptive, narrative/imaginative, informational, persuasive and argumentative texts.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.4.1.LI.1 Create imaginative text to convey ideas, feelings and mental pictures (images).
Talk for Learning (TfL): · Learners, collaborating with one another in mixed ability groups, examine sample materials (sample
essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media) and discuss the structure of a linear narrative essay; i. Introductory paragraph containing: · Central Idea (for the essay) · Supporting sentences (to serve as topic sentences in the body paragraphs). ii. Body paragraphs (containing main ideas--topic sentences), iii. Concluding paragraph · Learners apply various useful strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs.

Assessment
1.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Note: Learners use the appropriate linking words that show linearity, e.g. first, then, further, finally, ...

Critical-Thinking Skills: · Critical thinking entails analysis and evaluation. Therefore, learners acquire critical thinking and
problem-solving skills as they analyse their topics and systematically organise their ideas to develop the plot structure of the story; the beginning, rising action, climax, falling action and conclusion. · Learners use devices such as metaphors, similes, personification, imagery, hyperbole, and alliteration to bring out the style of a narrative piece. · Learners use appropriate expressions to link ideas or sentences in a paragraph for coherence. E.g. besides, in addition, moreover, again, furthermore, etc. · Communication skills are acquired as learners share their ideas with peers and accept constructive feedback through communication and collaboration in order to achieve the basic required skills.

Individual Work: · Learners individually compose an introductory paragraph containing the following:
i. Central idea (suitable for an essay) ii. Supporting sentences linked with appropriate cohesive devices (and, before, since, while, as,
until etc.) , suitable background information and a conclusion.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 207

· Learners individually design story maps as guides and compose body paragraphs and concluding paragraphs.
· Learners appreciate the value of respect for one another in their groups.
1.4.I.LI.2 Justify opinions using reasons and evidence.
Experiential Learning: Learners are placed in mixed groups to debate. The winner of each round meets another group until the best group emerges. Learners choose their own speakers and judges. Each group writes out the speeches for the debate based on the given topic, with suitable vocatives, persuasive language, and rhetorical questions. The ideas are well arranged, systematically, from the beginning to the end.

1.4.1.AS.1
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Talk for Learning: Learners in small groups discuss a given topic for a debate.

Teaching and Learning Resources

Structuring Talk for Learning: Learners in their mixed ability groups use concept maps to illustrate their ideas for and against a given topic.
· Sample essay · Passages from books, · Journals, · Sample texts from social media, · Story map etc.

208 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Content Standards 1.4.1.CS.2 Apply writing skills to specific life situations.
Teaching and Learning Resources

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI
1.4.1.LI.1 Compose curriculum vitae/resume, business proposal and personal statement/statement of purpose on given topics using appropriate format.
Group Work/Collaborative Learning: · In mixed ability groups, learners examine sample essays (sample essays and passages from books,
journals and the internet) to identify their features. · Learners, in their groups, plan and develop non-linear narrative essays focusing on the elements of
unity, coherence and paragraph completeness with appropriate transitional expressions. · In the same or different mixed ability groups, learners compose essays in which events are not
presented sequentially but rather mixed so that events are linked through flashbacks and other literary techniques such as suspense and foreshadowing to develop the plot of the narrative. · In writing the story, learners may use first person, second person and third person (third-person omniscient or limited perspective) to represent the voice of the person telling the story (narrator). Revise and edit the writing for sense or meaning, and effect (emotional reaction). Proofread to selfcorrect or peer-edit. Publish or present in various media including ICT and on the various notice boards on the school's premises. Learners refer to books and the internet for examples of cohesive devices such as Time clauses, Conditional clauses, Purpose clauses, Reason clauses, Result clauses, Clauses of Concessive, etc. This search on the Internet will enhance their technology skills. · Learners work collaboratively and employ appealing strategies to compose their concluding paragraphs. E.g., restating, by paraphrasing, the central idea of the entire essay and supporting ideas. · Learners peer evaluate what they have written. · Working in groups, learners acquire the value of contributing to a common goal. · The following skills are also acquired: communication and collaboration, critical thinking and problem solving, innovation and creativity and leadership and collaboration.

Assessment
1.4.1.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

· Sample essays and passages from books · Journals and the Internet.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 209

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
4. WRITING
3. BUILDING AND PRESENTING KNOWLEDGE

Learning Outcomes
1.4.1.LO.1 Incorporate and acknowledge data from various print and digital sources through proper referencing and citation.

21st Century Skills and Competencies
Communication and Collaboration Skills: · Learners develop the potential to accept the views of others in
complementing their own creative potentials. · The ability of learners to present ideas using appropriate words
is enhanced.
Leadership and Personal Development: · Learners are able to convince others to accept their points of
views by using appropriate words and manner of presentation. · Learners are able to categorise ideas for easy consumption of an
audience.
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: · Learners are able to arrange ideas logically as they endeavour to
communicate. · Learners evaluate their own ideas as they aim at communicating
appropriately to their audience.

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values
GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different
linguistic backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice
inclusion. · examine and dispel misconceptions/
myths about gender in relation to language and communication. · interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities. · identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals. · be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: To promote holistic learning, social and emotional learning strategies must be consciously integrated in the teaching and learning process through; · working in collaborative ways.
· developing habits of turn-taking in diverse communicative settings.

210 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· negotiating conflicts constructively. · sharing their opinions to grow in
awareness of their own emotional reaction and to notice the facial expressions and posture of others. · learning to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours. · tolerating one another in a group as they play and learn. · accepting responsibility for one's own actions and inactions. National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, friendliness, open-mindedness, patience, hard work, humility, teamwork
ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 211

Content Standards
3.4.3.CS.1 Research to build and present knowledge.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 3.4.3.LI.1 Referencing and citing information from multiple print and digital sources.
Talk for Learning (TfL): Learners in small groups discuss the name of author, date/year, title, the publishing institution/house/company and other information of a literary work in print or electronic media.

Critical-Thinking Skills Learners in their mixed ability groups use concept maps to illustrate information from multiple print and digital sources.

Assessment
3.4.3.AS.1 Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

Individual Work: · Learners individually write a referencing of a literary work using APA (American Psychological
Association) system style. E.g. Derwing, T. M., Rossiter, M. J., & Munro, M. J. (2002). Teaching native speakers to listen to foreign-accented speech. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 23(4), 245-259.

In-text citation and reference list · APA in-text citation style uses the author's last name and the year of publication, e.g. (Field, 2005).
For direct quotations, include the page number as well, e.g. (Field, 2005, p. 14).

Teaching and Learning Resources

NB: There are four widelyused referencing styles or conventions. They are called the MLA (Modern Languages Association) system, the APA (American Psychological Association) system, the Harvard system, and the MHRA (Modern Humanities Research Association) system.
Sample essay, passages from books, journals, sample texts from social media, story map etc.

212 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

Subject
Strand
Sub-Strand

ENGLISH LANGUAGE
5. LITERATURE
1. NARRATIVE, POETRY AND DRAMA

Learning Outcomes 3.5.1.LO.1 Explore different literary texts to create meaning and convert into other genres.

21st Century Skills and Competencies

GESI, SEL and Shared National Values

Communication and Collaboration: · Learners apply their creative skills to compose their own
scripts. · Learners explore different literary texts to create meaning. · Learners convert one form of literary genre to another.
Digital Literacy: Using the internet for their research, learners improve upon their digital skills.

GESI: Learners learn in an environment which promotes gender equality and social inclusion and are able to: · respect individuals of different linguistic
backgrounds. · embrace diversity and practice inclusion.
· examine and dispel misconceptions/ myths about gender in relation to language and communication.
· interrogate stereotypes and biases about gender and language use in their homes and communities.
· identify injustice, especially in recognition of the contributions of different groups and individuals.
· be sensitive to the inter-relatedness of various aspects of life.

SEL: · Learn to build emotional capabilities as
they work with one another in groups. · Share opinions to grow in awareness of
their own emotional reactions. · Notice the facial expressions and posture
of others as they share their experiences.

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 213

214 | ENGLISH LANGUAGE

· Ask questions that relate to the actions of people in texts and stories.
· Learn to interact with others in meaningful and positive ways, which can lead to a reduction in selfish behaviours.
· Tolerate the views of others.
National Core Values: Respect, tolerance, integrity, responsibility, kindness, bravery, citizenship, determination, friendliness, openmindedness, patience, hard work, humility

Content Standards
3.5.1.CS.1 Demonstrate understanding of how various elements of literary genres facilitate understanding of a text.

Learning Indicators and Pedagogical Exemplars with 21st Century Skills and Competencies, and GESI 3.5.1.LI.1 Convert narratives to play scripts and vice versa.
Experiential Learning: · Use interactive activity to turn narrative into play script and vice versa. · Have learners do group/paired work.
Creativity and Innovation: Encourage learners with special learning needs to participate fully in the writing process.

Assessment
3.5.1.AS.1 Level 1Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended reasoning

Presentation Skills: Learners in their mixed ability groups present their scripts and have room for them to explain themselves respecting one another's views.
3.5.1.LI.2 Analyse how writers use descriptions to create setting.

Teaching and Learning Resources

Creativity and Innovation: · Learners identify creative and innovative ways to describe the settings in
1. Narratives 2. Drama 3. Poetry. · Analyse the relevance of setting the conflict and its resolution. · Analyse the relevance of setting (e.g. place, time, costumes) to the mood and theme of a text. · Use a grade level text to make meaning using the literary devices.

· Level-appropriate texts · Students' made scripts

· Presentations · Literary devices games

3.5.1.AS.2
Level 1 Recall Level 2 Skills of conceptual understanding Level 3 Strategic reasoning Level 4 Extended critical thinking and reasoning

ENGLISH LANGUAGE | 215
